Understanding the relationship between cities, suburbs, and schools requires us to rethink how an earlier generation of historians created separate bodies of literature and effectively drew boundaries around their disciplinary subfields. On one side of this scholarly divide, urban and suburban historians (such as Arnold Hirsch, Making the Second Ghetto, and Ken Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier) documented how federal housing policies and racial discrimination fueled the post-war decline of cities and expansion of outlying suburbs, but education does not play a meaningful role in their equation. On one side, educational historians who followed the lead of David Tyack (The One Best System) focused on the rise and fall of big-city school districts, and paid little attention to their relationship with the suburbs. But these two subfields failed to connect with one another. In general, educational historians have not yet connected the decline of urban schools with the growth of the suburbs, and the broader political and economic shifts in the metropolitan context. Likewise, urban historians have rarely discussed what role schools played in the transformation of cities and suburbs.
Perhaps we should not be surprised by this disconnection between the historical scholarship on suburbs and schools. Most suburban (and urban) historians have been trained almost exclusively in history departments, while historians specializing in schools have been more likely to be housed within departments of education. While the physical distance separating these two buildings may be relatively small on most university campuses, the gap between the two bodies of literature is remarkably wide. It almost appears as if scholars have drawn disciplinary boundaries to stay out of each other’s intellectual terrain. Whereas most educational historians halted at the city line, urban and suburban historians generally stopped at the schoolhouse door. [^fn1]
To bridge this gap, the book draws on what scholars call "metropolitan history" or "the new suburban history" (Kruse and Sugrue) to underscore the dynamic relationship between schooling and housing, and their combined role in shaping twentieth-century US city-suburban inequality.

REWRITE AND FLIP

When Kenneth Jackson published Crabgrass Frontier in 1985, his influential book sparked the study of mass suburbanization, but did not clearly resolve how public education fit into the equation. Most of Jackson’s study explored how other realms of public policy -- such as federally subsidized home mortgages and highways -- intersected with white families’ aspirations toward the American Dream of single-family home ownership, and desire to move away from cities with increasing minority populations. In the conclusion, the author boiled down his causal analysis of mass suburbanization to “two necessary conditions. . . the suburban ideal and population growth -- and two fundamental causes -- racial prejudice and cheap housing.” Public schools emerged only briefly in this otherwise comprehensive volume, in a few paragraphs after this conclusion. In the wake of the 1954 Brown school desegregation ruling, Jackson claimed, “millions of families moved out of the city ‘for the kids’ and especially for the educational and social superiority of smaller and more homogenous suburban school systems.”[^fn2]
Jackson clearly identified a fundamental motivator: white middle-class families were driven by social mobility aspirations and racial avoidance. But linking this to the Brown decision overlooks a chronological issue: during the immediate postwar era, suburban public education was not a primary motivator for middle-class movement. To the contrary, many suburban schools initially appear to have been strong disincentives. When the first mass-produced suburb opened in Levittown, New York in 1947, local school officials could not provide facilities to match enrollments, and resorted to teaching students in temporary Quonset huts, then scheduling half-day split sessions by 1953.[^fn3] When another Levittown development opened near Philadelphia in 1958, sociologist Herbert Gans found that most residents moved to this suburb for lower housing costs; less than one percent cited schooling as the reason for leaving their previous residence or selecting their new community. Furthermore, the newly suburbanized school district did not meet Levittowners’ expectations. Gans devoted an entire chapter to the intense conflicts he observed between the long-standing school superintendent, who had been accustomed to providing a traditional, basic education to rural families, and newly arrived middle-class parents, who demanded a more challenging and expensive curriculum to prepare their children for prestigious colleges and universities.[^fn4] Over time, something clearly changed. Beginning in the late 1950s and early ‘60s, suburban education shifted to become an incredibly powerful magnet that attracted families who willingly paid higher private housing costs for the privilege of more desirable public schools. Today’s journalists and policy analysts sharply contrast urban-suburban educational quality -- and underlying disputes over access and funding -- as a central division in metropolitan politics. How and why did schooling become so influential in suburban history? Schools clearly matter, but not in the way that Jackson and related scholars have told their stories.[^fn5]
A parallel problem appears among educational historians, whose leading works have tended to focus on the rise and fall urban school districts, with scarcely any reference to suburbs. David Tyack’s The One Best System (which shaped his field as much as Jackson’s book did for suburban historians), explained the evolution from rural districts to urban educational systems. From the Progressive era through the immediate postwar era, most big-city public school districts stood out as the crown jewels of their metropolitan regions. Although individual school quality varied considerably inside each district, several cities featured prestigious public high schools with grander facilities, curricula, teams, and reputations than their less densely populated neighbors.[^fn6] Tyack’s otherwise comprehensive account did not discuss a profound spatial change of the twentieth century that radically altered American schooling: mass suburbanization.[^fn7]  Leading case studies that have followed in this field, such as Jeffrey Mirel’s The Rise and Fall of an Urban School System, have done somewhat better in this regard. Postwar suburbanization was “both a blessing and a curse” for Detroit, he argues; rising demand for cars benefitted the city’s industry, but the municipal property tax base fell as white middle-class families and factories moved out. Increasing numbers of black working-class families arrived in the city from the South at the same time that its public school system had fewer resources to meet their needs. Furthermore, Mirel briefly links the fate of Detroit’s city schools to Michigan politics, where a rural-suburban block arose in the state legislature that opposed increasing funding for urban school districts.[^fn8] But for Mirel, as for most educational historians, the primary narrative focuses on the rise and decline of big-city school systems, while suburbs are relegated to the sidelines.

A handful of recent historical works on suburbs and civil rights suggest some new ways of thinking about the importance of schools in shaping twentieth-century metropolitan development. In his rich overview of Northern struggles, Tom Sugrue points out that early local battles against segregated schooling were usually initiated by “suburban and small-town blacks [who] almost always lived close to whites,” rather than their big-city counterparts.[^fn9] Southern historians of suburbanization also address schooling with the rise of 1960s and ‘70s court-ordered school desegregation mandates that encompass countywide districts. The most compelling accounts draw analytical connections between cities, suburbs, and schooling, such as Matthew Lassiter’s The Silent Majority, which focuses on the shift in political language used by middle-class suburban white Southerners who opposed court-mandated school desegregation. By replacing overt racism with a “color-blind” rhetoric of individual merit, growing numbers of Southerners asserted their right to buy a suburban home and send their children to the neighborhood public school, linking their dual roles as parents and property owners, particularly during a time when “the physical location of homes and schools became the primary markers of a family’s socioeconomic status.”[^fn10] His analysis gives equal weight to race and social class as explanatory factors in the expansion of the metropolitan Sun Belt, revealing more about tensions between upper- and lower-class white neighborhoods than the simplistic “white flight” trope. Similarly, because Becky Nicolaides specifically examines a working-class Los Angeles suburb in My Blue Heaven, she identifies how homeowners’ fears over rising property taxes were expressed most dramatically in the local politics of education, with changing outcomes as the racial composition of schools shifted from the 1930s to the 1960s.[^fn11] Furthermore, Rosalyn Baxandall and Elizabeth Ewen’s Picture Windows features heated battles over local education amid the growing diversity of suburban Long Island, partly because of their decision to focus on several women’s life stories, which were shaped considerably by the newly constructed suburban schools their children attended and the political identities they created with other neighbors.[^fn12]  
This article[ CHAPTER] argues that bridging the gap between suburban and educational history will enrich our analysis of how and why change happened in the postwar era. We already know a great deal about the rise and fall of central cities and their school systems, but do not know as much about the transformation of metropolitan space, especially increasing variation between suburbs over time. What caused some previously rural towns to become elite suburban school districts during the twentieth century? Why did the fortunes of selected suburbs rise higher and faster than their neighboring communities, and how do we explain the relative decline of others in recent years? Since the “white flight” narrative only describes movement away from cities, how do we understand which factors attracted different groups of whites to resettle in certain suburbs over others? Overall, the “new suburban history” (or what some call metropolitan history) needs a richer understanding of the role of schools in order to explain regional stratification and diversity during the twentieth century.[^fn13]
A key dynamic in this story is the interplay between public school politics and private housing markets, which increasingly helped solidify metropolitan space during the twentieth century. Specifically, this article points to the growing practice of “shopping for schools”: the buying and selling of private homes to gain access to more desirable public school attendance zones. Three groups of historical actors -- real estate agents, suburban homebuyers, and local government officials -- shaped this dynamic, usually cooperatively, but sometimes in conflict. To be sure, suburban growth and stratification have been driven by other factors, such as mortgage lending and federal housing policies, as Jackson and others have clearly documented. But in a postwar economy that emphasized human capital, “shopping for schools” clearly became an important family strategy for upward mobility, as higher-salary positions increasingly depended on educational credentials, which in turn relied on the status of one’s public school system. During the course of the twentieth century, suburban families became more conscious of this equation: buying a home in the “right” neighborhood in order to send their children to a “good” public school, would increase their odds of being accepted to a “top-ranked” college, and help them to land the “perfect” job. In short, the histories of schooling and suburbs come together at the intersection of educational credentialism with postwar consumerism. Sideline: See an extended historiographical literature review in Bridging the Gap essay.
[ Add and link essay.]FOOTER[ <div class="textbox centered web-only">Learn more <a href="/book/front-matter/about-the-book">about the book</a>, including <a href="/book/front-matter/how-to-cite/">how to cite</a> and <a href="/book/front-matter/how-to-comment/">comment</a>, at <a href="/book/">OnTheLine.trincoll.edu</a>.</div>]

[^fn1]: David Tyack, The One Best System: A History of American Urban Education (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974); Arnold R Hirsch, Making the Second Ghetto: Race and Housing in Chicago, 1940-1960 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983); Kenneth T Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985).

[^fn2]: Kenneth T. Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), pp. 287, 289-90.

[^fn3]: Jon C. Teaford, The Metropolitan Revolution: The Rise of Post-Urban America (New York: Columbia University Press, 2006), 78-79

[^fn4]: Herbert J. Gans, The Levittowners: Ways of Life and Politics in a New Suburban Community (New York: Pantheon, 1967), pp. 31-41, 86-103.

[^fn5]: Two recent exemplars of suburban history barely mention schools in their otherwise illuminating accounts. In Robert Self’s American Babylon: Race, Power, and the Struggle for the Postwar City in California (Princeton University Press, 2003), he examines the suburban roots of the Proposition 13 property tax revolt and curtailment of governmental services, yet refers only once to public schools (p. 166), according to reviewer Michael Flamm, “Destructive Winds,” Reviews in American History, 32, no. 4 (2004): 552-7. Similarly, David Freund’s Colored Property: State Policy and White Racial Politics in Suburban America (University of Chicago Press, 2007) explores how white views of race and private property evolved over time in suburban Detroit, yet makes only one brief reference to neighborhood schools, pp. 339-40.

[^fn6]: David Tyack, The One Best System: A History of American Urban Education (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974).

[^fn7]: Harvey Kantor, “In Retrospect: David Tyack’s The One Best System,” Reviews in American History 29 (2001): 326. Tyack’s book examined postwar demographic and economic changes in cities (pp.  276–78), but did not discuss how suburbanization altered the politics of education.

[^fn8]: Jeffrey Mirel, The Rise and Fall of an Urban School System: Detroit, 1907–1981 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993), 218–21, 244–50, 294–98.

[^fn9]: Thomas Sugrue, Sweet Land of Liberty: The Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North (New York: Random House, 2008), p. 175.

[^fn10]: Matthew D. Lassiter, The Silent Majority: Suburban Politics in the Sunbelt South (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006), p. 9. Compare with a Southern urban analysis by Kevin Kruse, White Flight: Atlanta and the Making of Modern Conservatism (Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 2005).

[^fn11]: Becky M. Nicolaides, My Blue Heaven: Life and Politics in the Working-Class Suburbs of Los Angeles, 1920–1965 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), 156–68, 286–94. See also social class comparisons of public education struggles across several regions in Teaford, The Metropolitan Revolution, pp. 34-37, 78-84, 152-6.

[^fn12]: Rosalyn Baxandall and Elizabeth Ewen, Picture Windows: How the Suburbs Happened (New York: Basic Books, 2000). For an extended historiographical analysis with additional examples of cross-over scholarship, see Jack Dougherty, "Bridging the Gap Between Urban, Suburban, and Educational History," pp. 245-259, in Rethinking the History of American Education, ed. William J. Reese and John L. Rury (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2007).

[^fn13]: On the “new suburban history” and its recognition of variation between and within suburbs, see Kevin M. Kruse and Thomas J. Sugrue, eds. The New Suburban History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006). On “metropolitan history” and the city-suburb dynamic, see Amanda I. Seligman, "The New Suburban History [Review Essay]," Journal of Planning History 3, no. 4 (2004): 312-23.
