## Growing Suburbs without Regional Governance

Chapter argument:
Like many states, Connecticut experienced dramatic suburban population growth during the twentieth century
But unlike other areas, Connecticut's cities did not expand their territory through annexation.
Suburban residents fought to keep their nineteenth-century boundary lines intact
Result is a state divided into 169 separate town governments...

Growth of suburban towns around city created an economically interdependent metropolitan area, but suburban leaders successfully fought against annexation and demanded local---not regional--governance system... with few exceptions for shared services...

Governance remained very local, not regional; in fact, CT dissolved counties

Metro Hartford is a made-up term. It has no official meaning, no official boundaries. But I'll continue to use it in this book

There are some regional entities in CT, but not the norm.

A regionalist approach to public education might have made sense in Greater Hartford as late as 1920s, given other regional entities already in place or in creation. At minimum for secondary schooling. . . But it did not happen. In fact, opposite occurred. Planning for sewers, not schooling.

## Growing Suburbs

Many factors led to increasing population during twentieth century, especially shift away from rural agricultural economy toward city jobs and housing

Explore the Map: Connecticut Suburbanization, 1900-2010
In this <a href="https://ontheline.github.io/otl-pop-dot-density/index-frame.html">animated map</a> of the suburbanization of Connecticut, each dot equals 1,000 people, randomly placed in their corresponding town. Click the replay button or drag the time slider. Source: US Census summary, CT Secretary of State.[footnote]https://github.com/JackDougherty/otl-pop-dot-density.


Aerial photo map

Expanded transportation network
	Adam Polinski trolleys to buses, later to interstate highways

- Aerial photo map

## Fighting Against Annexation

When the carving up of town borders finally ceased in 1920, the relatively small state of Connecticut had been subdivided into 169 local town governments. But not all were content with the contours of the political map. After West Hartford separated from Hartford in 1854, residents on both sides of the line debated whether to merge the former "West Division" back into the city. One annexation proposal arose in 1895, shortly after West Hartford began to emerge as a "streetcar suburb," with the introduction of trolley lines that made downtown commuting much more feasible, and an economic boom in the construction of larger, more expensive homes. Annexation supporters focused on the high taxes and lack of services in West Hartford, particularly in the more affluent east side neighborhood that shared a border along Prospect Avenue with the city's West End. But farmers living in the western half of West Hartford rallied to defeat this measure.

NOTE: On the 1895 annexation debate, see Burr, From Colonial Parish to Modern Suburb, p. 44.

Again in the 1920s, Hartford's most prominent business leaders advanced proposals for annexation, with support from suburban allies. During their initial 1922 campaign, the Chamber focused primarily on annexing West Hartford's east side neighborhood, home to some of the city's wealthier businessmen. W.L. Mead, a former newspaper editor, outlined the Chamber's argument that money which had been earned inside the city was unfairly moved across the border to suburbs that reaped its benefits, yet did not pay for Hartford's infrastructure. When Connecticut collects taxes from Hartford businessmen who reside in West Hartford, the state redirects the city's revenue to the suburbs. "By drawing an imaginary line," Mead suggested, "this [tax revenue] would reach Hartford, where it morally belongs." Mead believed that consolidation of the city and suburb was inevitable. "The best interests of Hartford and West Hartford are wrapped up in the greater city and the bringing together of the two towns under the same municipal government., it would seem, cannot be delayed infinitely," he concluded.[^fn2] But West Hartford political leaders, particularly those affiliated with the local Republican Party, sharply criticized the annexation plan. "The proposal originates with Hartford, not with West Hartford," noted State Representative Huntington Meech, who added that it would be "a mighty good business proposition for the city, which would get a small area, thickly populated, well developed, with improvements all in."[^fn3] Meech and other West Hartford residents refused to hand over the wealthier and more established portion of their suburb, and they prevailed in a public referendum and in the state legislature.

NOTES: [^fn2]: “West Hartford’s Annexation Will Be Recommended,” Hartford Courant, August 8, 1922, http://search.proquest.com/hnphartfordcourant/docview/557093317/abstract/9EA85A45E6224EADPQ/3?accountid=14405.

[^fn3]: “Willing to Fight Ceding East Side of West Hartford: Representative Meech Would Accept Renomination by Republicans Expects Issue to Come up in Assembly Annual Loss of $115,000 in Taxes to Town Involved, He Says,” Hartford Courant, August 19, 1922, http://search.proquest.com/hnphartfordcourant/docview/557093626/abstract/9EA85A45E6224EADPQ/2?accountid=14405.

CLARIFY dates of the 3 annexation proposals and political actions taken on them
- 1922 proposal to annex East Side only?
- 1923-24 proposal?
- dates of later initiatives?
- was this vote on first or second proposal? in 1923-24, Hartford tried to annex town for "Greater Hartford Plan" but voters turned down measure 2100 to 613 and bill defeated in Gen Assembly p44-45 (Burr)

Despite this initial defeat, the Hartford Chamber of Commerce launched a bolder campaign in 1925 to "bring West Hartford back home." In response to past criticism that Hartford tried to steal away the wealthier east side of the suburb, the Chamber advanced its new proposal to annex the entire town—both developed neighborhoods and undeveloped farmland—into the city. Moreover, the Chamber submitted its annexation bill to the state legislature with the backing of twenty of the most prominent business leaders, including residents of both the city and the suburb. The "back home" campaign was backed by Louis Butler, president of Traveler's Insurance and Samuel Store, president of Colt's firearms manufacturing (two of the nation's largest companies in their industries) and Samuel Ferguson, the president of Hartford Electric Light and also a West Hartford resident. The annexation bill also received a strong endorsement from the Hartford Courant, the Republican-leaning newspaper based in a heavily Democratic city. "The interest of both Hartford and West Hartford would be best served by a return of the situation prevailing prior to 1854 when West Hartford was set off from the city," read the Courant editorial, noting that there was simply "no just ground for opposition to the bill" that the wisest and most experienced business leaders supported. Yet suburban leaders strongly disagreed and successfully blocked these annexation efforts. The Hartford-West Hartford boundary remained unchanged.

[^fn4]: The Chamber of Commerce, “Formal Steps For Bringing West Hartford ‘Back Home,’” Hartford 10, no. 4 (January 1925): 1, 4, 14.“Editorial: Hartford and West Hartford,” Hartford Courant, April 28, 1925, http://search.proquest.com/hnphartfordcourant/docview/553973807/abstract/9EA85A45E6224EADPQ/4?accountid=14405.

Explore the Source:
Read excerpts from the Hartford Chamber of Commerce campaign to annex West Hartford in its January 1925 publication, scanned from the Connecticut State Library.
1925-HartfordChamberOfCommerce.pdf

Similar annexation debates rose—--and fell—--in other towns, sometimes motivated by suburban aspirations to improve local education by joining forces with more established city public school systems. In Newington, a rapidly growing streetcar suburb, located on Hartford's southern border, annexation advocates sought to make a deal with a larger urban neighbor during the mid-1920s to gain better services at a lower property tax rate. While Newington's center district briefly considered merging with Hartford, residents of the suburb's western neighborhoods actively lobbied to be annexed by the adjacent City of New Britain. But neither of these proposals survived in the state legislature. By 1930, Newington's population had doubled over the past decade to about 4,500 residents, but the town still lacked its own high school. That year, residents from the town's Elm Hill and Maple Hill neighborhoods voted in favor of annexation with New Britain by a margin of 200 to 7. Some of these suburban families most likely already sent their children to high school in New Britain, with costs subsidized by a state grant for rural communities without high schools. New Britain was the home of Connecticut Normal School, the first teacher training college in the state. The proposed merger had benefits for both sides. Suburban Newington families would receive access to New Britain's better school facilities, as well as fire and police protection, reportedly at a lower tax rate. In return, New Britain would benefit from millions of dollars in taxable property and also gain access to Newington's station on the New Haven railroad line. In 1931, New Britain's mayor arranged to negotiate the terms of a partial annexation with leaders from Newington and three other towns: Southington, Plainville, and Berlin. But suburban opponents to annexation killed the bill in the state legislature. In 1933, Newington's Republican leaders finally agreed to build their own high school, and accepted federal Public Works Administration funds from the Roosevelt Administration to achieve this goal, rather than redraw their boundary line.

NOTES: Elizabeth Sweetser Baxter, The Centennial History of Newington, Connecticut (Newington, CT: Lucy Robbins Welles Library, 1971); "Annexation Bill Rejected by House,” Hartford Courant, March 21, 1925, http://search.proquest.com/hnphartfordcourant/docview/553948362/abstract/1004F5FC89AB4EB7PQ/12?accountid=14405; “Annexation of Elm Hill Is Agitated: Petition Circulated to Secure Sentiment of Residents --Maple Hill May Be Included Newington,” Hartford Courant, May 15, 1927, http://search.proquest.com/hnphartfordcourant/docview/557364020/abstract/1004F5FC89AB4EB7PQ/16?accountid=14405; “Annexation Favored In Newington: Maple Hill and Elm Hill Residents Vote Approval of Plan to Join New Britain,” Hartford Courant, November 26, 1930, http://search.proquest.com/hnphartfordcourant/docview/557917194/abstract/1004F5FC89AB4EB7PQ/2?accountid=14405; “New Britain Takes First Step In Plan For Annexations: Mayor Authorized to Name Committee to Negotiate With Towns,” Hartford Courant, February 19, 1931, http://search.proquest.com/hnphartfordcourant/docview/557959785/abstract/1004F5FC89AB4EB7PQ/4?accountid=14405; “Newington Legislator Dead At 64: George W. Hanbury, in Assembly Since 1927,” Hartford Courant, April 1, 1933, http://search.proquest.com/hnphartfordcourant/docview/558278076/abstract/C53B3A30E2054013PQ/33?accountid=14405.


### Planning for Regional Sewers, not Schools {-}

A regionalist approach to public education might have made sense in Greater Hartford as late as 1920s, given other regional entities already in place or in creation. At minimum for secondary schooling. . . But it did not happen. In fact, opposite occurred. Planning for sewers, not schooling.

In 1927, after several failed attempts by Hartford to annex the town of West Hartford, an alternative proposal arose for a regional planning agency, initially called the Greater Hartford Commission, but later named the Metropolitan District Commission.


Early observers heralded the plan. . . According to Burbee In 1928 "It is a fitting approach to the tercentennial of the Constitution Towns, divided and redivided since 1635, that a movement has been inaugurated to bring parts of them back into closer union, each of course retaining its independence but all united in a 'metropolitan district' as to their common interests." p860

But this Hartford regional planning agency only happened because its scope was narrowly defined.
Originally --
	General Assembly considered regional commission, as long as no annexation, and vote to join by town residents Murphy p207; Charles Goodwin chaired panel in 1928. Goodwin "believed that the water, sewage, health, street paving, building inspections and zoning functions for the people of the capital area could be much better handled on a regional basis" 	But this "super agency" (author's phrase) was "just too big for the average person to accept" and disagreements over differences in streets, zoning, etc. 	State legislature narrowed the regional plan "By the endof March 1929, the only things left were water supply, sewerage, highlyways (to a small degree) and regional planning. The health work would not be taken from the otnws, nor would zoning issues" no electrical services Murphy p208
Regional schooling never even made it onto the table. . . .

West Hartford town leaders highly suspicious that a metropolitan district commission would eventually drag them into an annexation plan, which Republican town council had resisted for decades.

FOCUS ON HOLDEN dialogue with WH Town Council, all from [@AnnexationPlanDenied1927]

Members of the West Hartford town council were highly skeptical of any regional planning proposal, fearing that it was a covert move toward annexation by the city, which leading officials had opposed for decades.

WH town council members believed Holden "evaded the issue" and some felt this was "a covert move toward eventualy annexation"

"Flatly denying that he was interested in the annexation of west Hartford by Hartford and stating definitely that he was emphatically opposed to any such movement, Benedict M. Holden appeared before the West Hartford town council last night by special invitation, to defend his proposal for a Greater Hartford commission appointed by the governor to study the common problems of water supply, sewage disposal and zoning."

WH town council members suspicious of motivations unanimously opposed bill at prior meeting; State Rep John W Huling "declared that the bill was a covert move toward eventual annexation"

Holden seeks to clear up misunderstanding: "This bill has absolutely nothing to do with the annexation of West Hartford," he declared. "Why it's foolishness to even consider bringing West Hartford into Hartford," he said. "It won't happen within the next fifty years, you can depend on that."

Instead, Holden focused on "mutual protection of the towns involved against the serious menace of the ever increasing problems of water supply and sewage disposal. He pointed out that the towns are so closely interwoven in interests with each other and so interdependent that they responsibilities and problems of one were equally shared by all the others." Comm would include Hartford, West Hartford, Wethersfield, Windsor, Bloomfield and Newington

"If there is an epidemic of typhoid in Newington it will close the schools of West Hartford," he said. "If the water of Hartford is contaminated, your children who work in the offices of our city will be poisoned when they drink it. We've got to work together. We've got to form some kind of interlocking body to study these problems, discuss them and find solutions."

Commission would have 3 men for each town appointed by governor "to avoid a 'stacked' board"; half of commission expense by Hartford, one-fourth by West Hartford, and remainder by other smaller towns

Holden described it as a "great big efficient business proposition, absolutely above board and for the best interests of the several communities concerned." Commission members would receive no pay

Holden warns of future danger if no cooperative action is taken; "if Hartford and West Hartford continued to consume the amount of water during the next ten years that they had used in the past decade, they would be buying water from Massachusetts..."
[@AnnexationPlanDenied1927]


West Hartford leaders also expressed skepticism about the MDC as a possible school takeover, offering the first hints of possible superiority over city schools. . . .
Public hearing by Cities and Boroughs Cmte at legilslature
Benedict M Holden spoke in favor of a Greater Hartford Commission (5 reps from Hartford, 4 from West Hartford, to be named by governor, to proposed charter for voters of H and WH would later act; not an annexation measure, he says
Aubrey L. Maddock of WH opposes plan, and says "Holden "neglected to mention the school question," adding that some day Hartford may have consolidated schools, "when it will have more to offer West Hartford than it has today."
Deputy Sherriff Charles E Lord, a WH town council member, opposes annexation: "West Hartford does not want to send children 'to such a school sysem as you have here,' and that he knows of instancees in which residents of hartford are attempting to provide for the entrance of their children to West Hartford schools"
NOTE: 1927-03-16-HC W. Hartford Still Opposes

At this time, WH residents did not claim their schools to be superior to Hartford, and certainly could not do so at the secondary level, and HPHS reigned supreme. . .. But they expressed doubts about Hartford's failure to consolidate all of its smaller districts into one citywide district, as the 1909 state law required, with time delay for Hartford.

REWRITE below to emphasize how West Hartford refused to cooperate in metro water and sewer district until 1984---over 50 years after it began---matching Holden's prediction!

In November 1929, voters in the City of Hartford and four adjacent towns (Bloomfield, Newington, Wethersfield, and Windsor) approved the referendum to join the Metropolitan District Commission. But East Hartford pulled out before the referendum. West Hartford voters rejected the referendum, and instead relied on prior reservoir sharing arrangements. The town finally decided to join the MDC five decades later in 1984. (Murphy 208-09)
Kevin Murphy, Water for Hartford: The Story of the Hartford Water Works and the Metropolitan District Commission (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 2010), https://books.google.com/books?id=oud2Zgjwus4C.

10 April 1929 p138
SB 256
An Act Creating a Metropolitan District within the County of Hartford
Favorable
H, WH, Windsor, Wethersfield, Newington, Bloomfield for water, sewage, highways, regional planning; referendum in each town
@connecticutgeneralassemblyCitiesBoroughsJoint1929



The MDC took over responsibility for Farmington Valley reservoir system for delivering clean drinking water in 1930, and it built the first major sewage treatment plant in Hartford's South Meadows, to reduce direct dumping of raw sewage into the Connecticut River, in 1938. Regional governance succeeded for water and sewer lines, but not for educating schoolchildren.

## Dissolving County Government in Connecticut

 Erasure of county government led to growth of local and state powers
	 Hartford County government was so weak that it was literally erased as political entity in 1960
Abolition of CT county government in 1960 bolstered its two dominant competitors: local town and state government.
As the govt unit closest to the people, "The towns occupy an emotional place in the hearts and minds of New England citizens, and any threat to diminish their powers would have resulted in an opposition stronger than that which accompanies any seeming threat to so-called states' rights in the South." p20, Rosaline Levenson. County Government in Connecticut: Its History and Demise. Storrs, CT: University of Connecticut Institute of Public Service, 1966/1981.


Lack of regional governance in education: (Robert: Separate town governance means separate tax systems mean differential funding of town schools exclusively for kids who parents cane afford to live in those towns. . . persisted through 1970s school finance reform)

	No county government; CT dissolved its county system in 1960, and no one noticed because it had almost no power.
	Regional planning agencies are not elected governments with tax authority
	Some regional entities do exist: the MDC for water, CT Transit (state or regional?)


Connecticut dissolved county government in 1960s
 and no one noticed, because the only meaningful governments were 169 towns and state government

Storymap? (or buttons until I can make this?)
MAP: show county outlines in bolder color, tab with pre-1960 and post-1960

CT has never had a strong regional government system
- CRCOG strengths and weaknesses
- CREC strengths and weaknesses

To be clear, shared regional services exist... See blue book, Regional Agencies
http://www.ct.gov/sots/cwp/view.asp?a=3188&q=392414

Regional school districts permitted, but mostly appear in rural areas
Separate schools, towns, police, fire, etc.

## Myth of Metropolitan Hartford

"Metropolitan Hartford" is not clearly defined (show census maps over time)


history of regional planning maps
@connecticutstatelibraryRegionalPlanningConnecticut2021

This chapter refers to the "metropolitan Hartford region," even though there is no clear definition of what that means over time. There has been no single defintion of the metropolitan Hartford area over time, which reflects the fragmented nature of the policy debate. . . .In fact, the phrase "metropolitan Hartford region" deserves quotation marks because there is no official standardized designation of its boundaries, a fact that makes it historically interesting. Both local and US census definitions of the "Greater Hartford" or "metropolitan Hartford" or "Hartford SMSA" have changed over time, as a result of shifting demographics and economic connections. Even the boundary designating Hartford County officially ceased to have any significant meaning after 1960 vote to dissolve it. Today we have acronyms naming some relatively weak regional planning and administrative agencies -- the Capital Region Council of Governments (CRCOG) and the Capitol Region Education Council (CREC) -- but as the story will show, these currently have limited power. ...
Link: Multiple Definitions of the Metro Hartford area over time
Design notes: untitled
Design notes: Compare with Nick Bacon's overlapping maps of different regional definitions. See Census Metro Defs Hartford.doc

(Refer to wealth or income chart by town, not map) The Connecticut Metropatterns report dispelled "the myth of the affluent suburban monolith" by illustrating how some suburbs face high levels of fiscal stress, based on the cost of educating their population of needy children relative to their local capacity to raise tax revenues. Myron Orfield and Thomas Luce, Connecticut Metropatterns: A Regional Agenda for Community and Prosperity in Connecticut (Minneapolis, MN: Ameregis, 2003), http://www.law.umn.edu/metro/metro-area-studies/metropolitan-area-studies-by-region.html.

## Myth of Local Control

@collierSleepingGhostsMyth1992

@hollisterMythRealityHome1985

16 April 1929 p167
SB 520 An act concerning Chapter 24 of the General Statutes
"This bill repeals Chapter 24 of the General Statues relative to Home Rule in towns. This law has not functioned satisfactirliy, as the towns were afraid to proceed under it, and would come back to the Legislature for validation of what they had done under Chapter 24. It is better not to have the Statutes cluttered with legislation that is not workable."
Favorable
@connecticutgeneralassemblyCitiesBoroughsJoint1929
