# Update redlining
## Federal Lending and Redlining {- #lending}
*by [Shaun McGann and Jack Dougherty](authors.html)*

This chapter compares two federal programs---the Home Owners' Loan Corporation (**HOLC**) and the Federal Housing Administration (**FHA**)---created to boost the housing market during the 1930s Depression by funding banks and other lenders to offer long-term mortgage loans to make homeownership more affordable for families. Both HOLC and FHA engaged in **redlining**, a systematic and geographical form of discrimination, where financial institutions avoid making investments by drawing real or imagined "red lines" around entire neighborhoods. Rather than evaluating only the individual applicant and their intended home purchase, redlining meant a lender made decisions based on the racial and socioeconomic composition of the area. Segregation was not caused solely by individual prejudice, but also by institutional government policies that denied or downgraded city neighborhoods with Black, immigrant, and working-class families, and favored loans in all-White middle-class suburban communities. TODO: Black newspaper writers began reporting their suspicions about these federal programs during the 1930s (CHECK MICHNEY), and community activists and researchers coined the term "redlining" during the early 1970s, based largely on anecdotal accounts by people who were told by lenders that no loans could be made in their neighborhoods.^[@llinoislegislativeinvestigatingcommissionRedliningDiscriminationResidential1975; @finleyChicagoFreedomMovement2015a]

Although FHA policies played a larger role in segregating America, HOLC gained more public attention over time because its eye-catching color maps became more widely accessible. When historian Ken Jackson published his widely-read *Crabgrass Frontier* book in 1985, he explained how both FHA and HOLC favored White suburban housing, but his black-and-white print book presented an outline sketch of a 1937 HOLC redlining map for St. Louis that had been buried away for decades in the US National Archives, as shown in FIG TODO. In the early 2000s, Amy Hillier examined both FHA and FHA lending in her scholarship, and led a younger generation of digital historians with her ["Redlining in Philadelphia" website](https://web.archive.org/web/20040130043548fw_/http://cml.upenn.edu/redlining/HOLC.html) that brought HOLC maps out of the archives and into living color on computer screens. When journalist Ta-Nehisi Coates wrote his widely-acclaimed "Case for Reparations" essay in 2014, *The Atlantic* magazine added an [interactive HOLC redlining map of Chicago on its website](https://www.theatlantic.com/media/interactives/2014/06/chicago/holc.html). Similarly, while Richard Rothstein's best-selling 2017 *The Color of Law* book described institutional racism in both the FHA and HOLC home lending programs, the front cover of his book featured an HOLC map. Around the same time, Robert Nelson and collaborators launched their first edition of [*Mapping Inequality*](https://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/), the most extensive digital collection of HOLC "redlining" maps in the nation.^[@jacksonCrabgrassFrontierSuburbanization1985; @hillierRedliningPhiladelphia2003, and her earlier print essay @hillierRedliningPhiladelphia2002; @coatesCaseReparations2014; @dintinoHOLCMapExplore2014; @rothsteinColorLawForgotten2017; @nelsonMappingInequalityRedlining2023, first launched in 2016, is currently in its third edition.]

1985-jackson-hillier-coates.png
Caption: From left to right, HOLC redlining maps became more colorful and accessible with digital history. Jackson's 1985 book with black-and-white outline map of St. Louis, Hillier's 2004 website with digitized static map of Philadelphia, Coates's 2014 essay with interactive map of Chicago. US federal government maps are in the public domain, and copyrighted portrayals of them are reprinted here under fair-use guidelines.

By 2020, redlining maps leaped out of the pages of history and exploded into national politics and popular culture.
At the Democratic presidential candidate debate, Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren challenged former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg's stance and supported her own by releasing a short historical ["What is Redlining?"](https://twitter.com/ewarren/status/1228009904973238274) video on Twitter, re-shared by over 10,000 subscribers. One year later, comedian John Oliver featured the history of redlining in a [Housing Discrimination episode](https://youtu.be/_-0J49_9lwc) on the satirical news television show, HBO's *Last Week Tonight*, with an additional 7 million views on YouTube. To the credit of John Oliver's research team, his show briefly showed a boring white FHA document, but his viewers were more likely to have remembered the color-coded HOLC redlining maps.^[@warrenWhatRedlining2020; @epsteinWarrenSaysBloomberg2020; @oliverHousingDiscrimination2021]

2020-warren-oliver.png
Caption: Eye-catching HOLC redlining maps featured in national politics by Elizabeth Warren on Twitter in 2020, and in popular culture by John Oliver on HBO/YouTube in 2021. Copyrighted images reprinted here under fair-use guidelines.

RESTART HERE...

When redlining crossed over into popular culture and politics, more people began talking about it, but key distinctions became blurrier. 


Hillier's generation of scholars also began to challenge some of Jackson's generalizations about redlining, or how at least how most readers interpreted Jackson's widely-discussed book. All agreed that redlining demonstrated racist **intent** of federal officials and financial lenders, but was its **impact** as strong as many believed? Or did other government-run mortgage programs, such as Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans, do more damage than HOLC redlining?
Some historians warn against confusing cause and effect: while HOLC maps *reflected* racist views of their creators, the maps alone did not *cause* discrimination..(wording?)   @gioielliTyrannyMapRethinking2022
Yet... direct evidence of how racist, elitist, and nativist influences in federal housing policies intensified racial and economic segregation in our community.
OR Growing public awareness of the history of redlining has pros and cons. On one hand, more people now see direct evidence of *institutional* housing segregation, countering a prevailing view that racism is driven only by *individual* property owners. On the other hand, increasing views of those eye-catching colorful redlining maps inadvertently fed a common misinterpretation that this HOLC program alone caused housing segregation. (Explain further and unpack "alone" and "caused")









- But as the history of redlining have become popularized, important distinctions about federal programs such as the HOLC and FHA have become blurred, and the latter portion of this chapter draws on scholarship by Amy Hillier, Todd Michney, and LaDale Winling to clear up common misunderstandings. One important lesson: although the HOLC color-coded maps provide the most visually striking portrayal of discrimination in government policy, the more powerful and enduring tools of segregation persisted in the plain white pages of the FHA's bureaucratic *Underwriting Manual*. For this reason, this chapter presents direct evidence from both HOLC and FHA to help us understand key differences in how they divided metropolitan America.
- differences between HOLC and FHA; @toddmichneyTweetHOLCFHA2021
 @winlingRootsRedliningAcademic2021
 read and add
 see Twitter summary https://twitter.com/toddmichney/status/1407696728678191108?s=11
 @michneyHowCitySurvey2022
 "The infamous 'security maps' made in the 1930s by the Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC), rating supposed mortgage lending risk in urban neighborhoods across the United States, have long been considered the quintessential expression of racist redlining policy. However, a number of misunderstandings and unwarranted speculations about how these maps were made and used have proliferated. Using previously unexamined correspondence, this article establishes that HOLC could not have used the maps for loan denials, did share them with the Federal Housing Administration but not with private industry, and highly improvised their production with numerous methodological inconsistencies, including with regard to race."
 see Twitter summary https://twitter.com/ToddMichney/status/1587080742504316928
 @nelsonRedliningRaceColor2021
 add: acknowledges several Boston neighborhoods that received Ds, had no Black residents, but immigrants on welfare
 SEE MORE by Michney on Rothstein
 https://twitter.com/ToddMichney/status/1440349960508112913

For readers who have not bought a home: You may not yet be familiar with key concepts in personal finance, such as how lower down payments with amortization of principal and interest have made home ownership a more affordable aspect of "The American Dream." See the "[Home and School Shopping Simulation](home-school-shopping.html)" in the Teaching and Researching chapter in this book for a learning activity developed while teaching undergraduate students about housing, to better understand the present-day realities in order to compare with the past.

### How Federal Lending Changed Homeownership {-}
During the 1920s, purchasing a home was difficult for even middle-class Americans











LATER?

With all of the attention on redlining ... still ask the questions... This chapter (summarize

SEE also Tom Sugrue on McWhorter about systematic racism
https://twitter.com/TomSugrue/status/1443336981178724359

See Michney and economist on different views of HOLC and FHA
https://twitter.com/toddmichney/status/1590362121933815815


Later mention Mapping Inequality redlining essays on other CT cities and suburbs:
@doughertyContextHartfordCT2023
@guestContextWaterburyCT2024
@wuContextNewBritain2024
@huberContextBridgeportFairfield2024
@jacksonContextNewHaven2024
@platerContextStamfordDarien2024

PROBABLY OMIT
While government involvement in the private lending market prevented millions of families from being forced out of their homes, and expanded homeownership to millions more, eligibility to participate in these programs was not neutral, and federal funds promoted racial and economic discrimination.^[@freundColoredPropertyState2007] Looking back at these 1930s programs reveals the thoughts and actions of public officials and private real estate interests, who together drew lines that intensified racial and economic segregation in metropolitan Hartford and other regions that continues today.
