# WAIT to revise Restricting

## OLDEST covenant now in East Hartford?

## Anti-Jewish in Columbia
Dave wrote:
Today I did some research in Columbia.  I found a subdivision called “Woodland Terraces”, which looks like it was originally laid out by Esther C. Knofla.  There are 29 lots in this development, and some of them border on Columbia Lake.
It looks like Ms. Knofla conveyed these properties to E.W.A., Incorporated.  E.W.A. then sold the lots; and the deeds for those sales are signed on behalf of E.W.A. by William A. Knofla (likely a relative of Esther), who signed in his capacity as Treasurer of E.W.A.  A number of the E.W.A. deeds say that “the premises herein conveyed shall not be conveyed to, leased to, used or occupied by any member of the Hebrew Race.”   This language is directly included in some of the deeds.  I’ll send an image of one such deed, from Volume 30, Page 7, dated April 7, 1948 – less than a month before the U.S. Supreme Court decided Shelley v. Kraemer.
When you receive the image of the deed, you will see that the deed also contains language to the effect that the buyers become members of “Woodland Terraces Association”, and they agree to abide by and conform to that organization’s rules and regulations.  I could not find a recorded copy of any rules and regulations of “Woodland Terraces Association”.  It apparently was (and/or is) private.
Some of the deeds for the sale of properties in Woodland Terraces, other than the one at Volume 30, Page 7,  do NOT INCLUDE the explicit anti-Hebrew covenant.  However, they DO INCLUDE the reference to the Association’s rules and regulations, and I would not be surprised if those rules and regulations contain racially restrictive provisions of some kind.  In other words, for some of the lots in Woodland Terraces, the restriction may very well reside in private documents that are “incorporated by reference”.


Jack wrote:
Wow, thank you for finding our first anti-Jewish covenant for a CT subdivision. We knew these racist property deeds were out there, but it took us longer to find this particular type than I had expected.

I will get to work on mapping this Columbia entry today, and am still looking for more source info in order to map some of the East Hartford entries.

My spouse Beth, who previously directed the Jewish Historical Society of Greater Hartford, tells me that the "Hebrew" label was more commonly used and more formal in the early 20thC when "Jew" was sometimes seen as a pejorative term. For example, the Young Mens Hebrew Association was created to counter discrimination by the Young Mens Christian Association (YMCA).

Also, given the overwhelming number of anti-Black covenants we've found across the state, it's noteworthy that this covenant bans Jews but does not mention Blacks. Beth also pointed out that Jewish farmers had moved into several rural towns across Eastern CT, like Columbia, so some dominant White Christians probably saw them as a more tangible threat to their property values. Attached is a map of Jewish farming communities from Finkle 2012, and see also illustrated short histories by Donohue 2010, Donohue 2006, and Blocker 2017.

REMOVED AND PLACE ELSEWHERE? because Ware found no evidence of racial covenants in Andover or Coventry
When Charles White and investors in the Andover Lake Corporation sought to attract buyers from Hartford, located 18 miles away, their initial 1928 full-page newspaper ad mentioned it was a "quiet, restricted lake" in regular-size type. One year later, as they struggled to entice buyers, their 1929 full-page ad made a bolder promise in a larger font: "Reasonable Restrictions Will Maintain the Desirability of this Development," as shown in Figure \@ref(fig:1929-04-28-hc-andover-lake). Those code words signaled that Andover Lake expressly prohibited Blacks and Jews from buying property with restrictive covenants in land records, according to two observers. **WRONG**: Woodward's 2019 article makes clear that his claim about explicit prohibitions against Black and Jewish residents came from the Rhinelander 1999 news article, which does not clearly state its sources. Similar euphemisms by other Connecticut lake associations advertised in the late 1920s that their property was "wisely restricted" (Secret Lake in Canton), had "sensible restrictions" (Pine Lake Shores in Coventry), and that "proper restrictions assure a happy, congenial family of vacationists" (Lake Hayward in Colchester).^[@AndoverLakeAd1928; @AndoverLakeAd1929; @rhinelanderAndoverLakeInvestors1999; @woodwardWadeIn19642019]
AND
Twenty miles north, the White-only Andover Lake Property Owners Association prohibited anyone---even other property owners---from swimming in the lake unless they received a two-thirds majority secret ballot. Racism ran so deep that when William Philpot, a Black minister from New Haven, successfully purchased an Andover Lake cottage in 1955, the Association rejected his application for lake access three times. Philpot protested by conducting a "Wade In" from his property to Andover Lake in 1964, with support from powerful allies, including Governor John Dempsey. Yet the Association filed an injunction to ban Philpot from the lake, and persisted until they lost in court in 1967, then finally changed their bylaws to allow any property owner to join.^[@demeusyNegroLandownerWins1967; @rhinelanderAndoverLakeInvestors1999; @woodwardJuly29Determined2021]

## Stamford
On a Stamford restrictive covenant discovered when Richard Blumenthal was campaigning for CT Attorney General, see @jacklinCivilityGettingTrampled1990; @keatingDejaVuMoment2010.



## 39 Colony Road
Dave
You don't have any obligation to dig into this, but I'm following up on our prior conversation about 39 Colony Road WH, in case it still interests you. If not, I can try to hire a title searcher.
As you recall, Shari Cantor stated in a recent oral history video that the home had a "restrictive covenant and did not allow Jewish people," but I have not yet seen any documents confirming this.
Using the WH online land records in the attached PDF, I have traced the sale of 39 Colony Road back to the Henry S Robinson Jr. estate in 1987. There are other clues on the PDF about possible prior sales to him, but I can't identify which of these is 39 Colony Road from the online index, so the rest needs to be done in the property records room. -- SEE PDF in otl-covenants wh-leads

WH GIS
Cantors purchased 2009 in v4431, p287
WH Land records
Cantor deed 3 Nov 2008 v4344 p103 from Wertheim Peter trust et al
Wertheim Allicia quit claim 16 March 2001 v2649, p90, 2 pg no img
Fiduciary Trust Co deed to Wertheim A 12 May 1989 v1411, p32
Robinson Henry S Jr est deed to Fiduciary 28 Dec 1987, v1273, p314
here is where I lose track of specific property in land records
Could be any of the following
1963 v352 p164, see ref v203 p305
1976 v567, p247, see ref v279, p554
1983 v855 p270
1985 v959, p6
1987 v1164, p304
made PDF printout

WH Mayor Shari Cantor interview excerpt transcript in @napervilleheritagesocietyWestHartfordConnecticut2022
she recalls a "restrictive covenant" but so far we have not found one; keep looking?
on moving (notes supplemented with WH property records)
(1985 name changed from Shari J. Granow to Shari G Cantor)
(1985 mortgage with Michael Cantor at 147-149 Dover Road)
(1991 moved w Michael to 19 Foxcroft Road)
(2008 moved to 39 Colony Road)
"We lived in a two-family house and we bought on Foxcroft Road. And then when our youngest son was in sixth grade, we moved to, the sort of the Hartford Golf Club area, **which actually had a restrictive covenant** and did not allow Jewish people. And now I think on our street, there are four or five houses that have Jewish owners. And so it's interesting that Jews were not allowed in that area, and there's a strong Jewish presence there now. Our two-family house was on Dover Road and we actually sold that home to HUD for affordable housing. And then we purchased our house on Foxcroft. And no it was not a Jewish neighborhood and that was something that actually I wanted for my children to not live in a Jewish neighborhood, but have Jewish education and understand their roots and the ethics and the culture. But no, that was not. That was something that we were actually looking to... And the traditional Jewish neighborhoods, many of the houses, a lot of people have wonderfully survived for years. As I said about, you know, our neighbor who was a Holocaust survivor. Many stayed in their homes. So there were a lot of older people in homes and we wanted to be in a younger neighborhood. And so that also made a difference."

See also how Shari Cantor briefly mentions the covenant, and her general views on affordable housing policy here:
Alex Putterman, “West Hartford Is Mostly White, While Bloomfield Is Largely Black; How That Came to Be Tells the Story of Racism and Segregation in American Suburbs,” Hartford Courant, February 21, 2021, sec. Connecticut, Bloomfield, Community, West Hartford, Capitol Watch, Politics, https://www.courant.com/news/connecticut/hc-news-west-hartford-bloomfield-housing-segregation-discrimination-20210214-eoobsguoybguznkoa4n2ravwli-story.html.

** See also how Tracey Wilson wrote about Shari Cantor's experience in this article, but does not refer to a restrictive covenant. Instead, Tracy writes:
By contrast, Shari Cantor, West Hartford’s current mayor and a resident on Colony Road since 2009, and others from the neighborhood say that Jews were excluded from buying on that street for many decades after the ample Tudor homes were built in 1929 and 1930. A look at the names from the city directory in 1958 supports this assertion.
Tracey Wilson, “How Segregation Happened in West Hartford,” Connecticut Explored 17, no. 3 (Summer 2019): 44–48, https://www.ctexplored.org/summer-2019-a-jurassic-discovery/.

## 19 Foxcroft Road
Instead of 39 Colony Road, what if Shari Cantor had a restrictive covenant on her prior home at 19 Foxcroft?
built in 1926, but I can only trace online land records back to 30 Aug 1974, Walter and Anna Twomey, book 529, p 636. Asked Dave Ware to follow up on paper.

See also PDF of whland-foxcroft-maps, which describe the 1926 Elizabeth Park Acres subdivision and prior owners

## 66-68 Foxcroft Road, Rosenstein family
- see PDFs in otl-covenants wh-leads, waiting to see if we pursue
- built 1947, plot purchased by Rachel Rosenstein 27 June 1944, v178, p429, 68 Foxcroft see https://gis.vgsi.com/westhartfordct/Parcel.aspx?pid=7633 (but originally 66 Foxcroft, see below)
- 20 Feb 1963 release v352 p409, no image, SEE ALSO REL CAVEAT v345, p400
- 24 Feb 1992 Quit Claim Rachel Rosenstein 3 parcels Foxcroft Road; v1647, p76, image
- 12 April 2004 NOTC address reassigned from 68 to 66 Foxcroft Road, v3485 p1, image, https://cotthosting.com/ctwesthartford/LandRecords/
- family history
- 1944 Mrs. Rachel Rosenstein, 40 Robin Road, WH, drove thru stop sign, 26 Feb 1944 HC https://www.newspapers.com/image/367928097
- 1947 Mrs. Nathan M. Rosenstein hosting Jewish social event at 66 Foxcroft Road https://www.newspapers.com/image/367892173/
- 1947 Mrs. Nathan Rosenstein hosting civil rights talk Quaker Lane Congress Club at 66 Foxcroft Road https://www.newspapers.com/image/367808289
- 1948 Rosenstein home photo for garden tour, 66 Foxcroft https://www.newspapers.com/image/367814312/
- 1951 photo Mrs. Nathan Rosenstein https://www.newspapers.com/image/369791277
- 1954 Samuel J. Rosenstein at 77 Foxcroft (same neighborhood, probably Nathan's brother, according to 1971 obit) accused of swindling government with defective wool sweaters https://www.newspapers.com/image/370485551
- 1971 obit for Nathan Rosenstein, 66 Foxcroft Rd, WH businessman, widow is Rachel Schultz Rosenstein, 27 Nov 1971 https://www.newspapers.com/image/368170298



2021 Email with Ali Oshinskie
Thanks for recommending further investigation of 68 Foxcroft Road
When my students and I researched restrictive covenants in West Hartford town records years ago, we looked at several addresses on Foxcroft to attempt to verify these oral accounts as told to Tracey Wilson:
By word of mouth I had heard that in the 1930s and 1940s and into the 1950s, no Roman Catholics could live on Stoner Drive, the first street developed on “the mountain.” No Catholics could buy on Wood Pond or Sunset Farms or West Hill or Sunnyreach. According to another resident, the address of a house on the corner of Foxcroft Road and Fern Street was changed to Fern Street because no Jews were allowed on Foxcroft Rd. But how many of these restrictions actually appear in West Hartford in writing and on legal documents? They have been hard to find in writing.
http://lifeinwesthartford.org/world-war-ii-era.html#high-ledge-homes-and-restrictive-covenants
We did not find anything on Foxcroft Road at that time, but I’ll add it to my list of addresses to check again when Town Hall opens up again.
Jack
On Mar 22, 2021, at 4:46 PM, Oshinskie, Ali <aoshinskie@ctpublic.org> wrote:
Thanks for the time today!
Sorry we had to hop off quickly, thanks for the time. I'll get to some sleuthing and also be in touch with some Waterbury historians. I'll let you know if I find anything.
The address I mentioned is 68 Foxcroft Road. I think you'll find it a little tricky because I think she told me they pieced together a few properties to create that larger than after one at some point.
Thanks again,
Ali
