Restrictive covenants TODO

CLARIFY terms:

A *property deed* refers to a legal document that transfers land from one party to another, and in Connecticut, is filed with the town clerk and enforced by the state courts. Written in the deed may be a *covenant* that restricts how the property may be used.

TODO: Map Redesign
Since the map is currently centered on the Hartford suburbs, I have attached a screenshot of Gilridge in Hamden. If you find and send me more restrictive covenants for Hamden or other New Haven suburbs, I will try to come up with a better map design to show both areas. Currently, if I zoom the map out to show more of CT, the purple polygons are very small and it's not easy for users to see and click on them. But I have an idea about creating a linked list of towns and developments that would appear in a sidebar to the map.

TODO: add new section at the end about how Ware persuaded CT legislators to pass law for current property owners to strike out or renounce deeds, and how he and Gold continue to search for covenants and help owners act on new law

TODO: add Dave Ware and CT bill 2021 @severanceRevelationRacistProperty2021; @haighStateLawmakersWork2021

add June Gold from Hamden
@mirminaWhenHamdenWoman2023



TODO: contact Donna Berman -- Years ago at the Charter Oak Cultural Center, I seem to recall seeing an historical exhibit or document on your wall about a restriction against Jews owning property on a specific street in Hartford, perhaps Scarborough Street. Does this ring a bell with you? Or is my memory getting fuzzy as I grow older? I’m asking because my Trinity student co-author and I are publishing a book chapter on race restrictive covenants in West Hartford, and we’re looking for evidence of religious covenants in the region.


Historical memory and CT politicians:
@keatingDejaVuMoment2010
"During his 1990 race for attorney general - his first for statewide office - Blumenthal needed to address a report that a restrictive covenant on his home mortgage in Stamford prevented the sale of the property to African Americans."
see details in @jacklinCivilityGettingTrampled1990


Found the Shari Cantor interview here:
Naperville Heritage Society, “West Hartford, Connecticut,” Unvarnished: A History of Housing Discrimination in the Northern and Western United States, 2022, https://unvarnishedhistory.org/local-spotlights/west-hartford-connecticut/.

Interesting how the West Hartford Historical Society collaborated on this grant-funded history project, but I don't see any link to it on the Noah Webster/WHHS website! Only a very brief mention of the "Unvarnished" project (without a link) in this calendar event listing.

See also how Shari Cantor briefly mentions the covenant, and her general views on affordable housing policy here:
Alex Putterman, “West Hartford Is Mostly White, While Bloomfield Is Largely Black; How That Came to Be Tells the Story of Racism and Segregation in American Suburbs,” Hartford Courant, February 21, 2021, sec. Connecticut, Bloomfield, Community, West Hartford, Capitol Watch, Politics, https://www.courant.com/news/connecticut/hc-news-west-hartford-bloomfield-housing-segregation-discrimination-20210214-eoobsguoybguznkoa4n2ravwli-story.html.

** See also how Tracey Wilson wrote about Shari Cantor's experience in this article, but does not refer to a restrictive covenant. Instead, Tracy writes:
By contrast, Shari Cantor, West Hartford’s current mayor and a resident on Colony Road since 2009, and others from the neighborhood say that Jews were excluded from buying on that street for many decades after the ample Tudor homes were built in 1929 and 1930. A look at the names from the city directory in 1958 supportsthis assertion.
Tracey Wilson, “How Segregation Happened in West Hartford,” Connecticut Explored 17, no. 3 (Summer 2019): 44–48, https://www.ctexplored.org/summer-2019-a-jurassic-discovery/.

TODO: Decide if Dave Ware's research strategy belongs in How We Found section, and if so, ask for his permission to include:
Anyway, having mentioned my “sampling” activity and my research approach, let me share that approach with you.  The approach is based on the fact that, especially in our “bedroom” towns, many larger tracts of land were subdivided and developed for residential purposes in the first half of the 20th century.  So, I go to the Town Clerk’s office of a given town, and here’s what I do:

- Look at subdivision maps on record at the town hall.  To start with, focus on subdivisions approved in the 1930’s and 40s.  That is the time frame when we probably have the greatest chance of identifying these covenants.  Expand to looking at subdivisions of the 20’s if there isn’t much happening in the 30’s and 40s.  In some towns, you may be able to access these maps on the Town Clerk’s computer, and in other towns, you will be looking at old, original paper maps stored in big, wide, flat drawers.  It’s a history lover’s dream!
- The maps will identify the owner of the property being subdivided, and/or the “developer” of the property.  Make a note of the names of those people or companies. And make a note of the DATE of the map.  Also, jot down the name of the subdivision – you know:  “Elm Ridge”, or “Clearview Heights”, or “Winter Hill”, or whatever.  All of that info will come in handy.
- For a “quick” sampling, I jot down the owner/developer names for the larger subdivisions – you know , those that are creating new neighborhoods of 30, 40, 50, 60 or more residential lots.  Those kind of developments are definitely ones where the developers want to create a “standard” form of deed for the sale of the lots to builders or homeowners, in order to keep things uniform among all of the buyers of the lots.  This is not to say that smaller subdivisions never contain the race-based covenants, but, again, for efficiency, I start with the bigger subdivisions.
- The developer or owner of the approved subdivision that you have just found (and made notes about) will become the first seller, or “Grantor” of all of the lots in that subdivision.  So, now consult the “Grantor Index” for the time period following the approval of the subdivision.  Example, if the subdivision was approved in 1940, I look at the grantor index for 1940 to 1950, and I look for the name of the developer or owner.
- Often, we see that the developer or “Grantor” for the newly approved development starts selling his lots relatively soon after approval of the subdivision, so we often see multiple entries by the developer/Grantor in the year or two following subdivision approval.  The entries in the Grantor Indexes usually contain a brief description of the property being conveyed.  So, e.g., if Burton Larson owned the property that was approved in 1940 as the “Winter Hill” development, and if Larson sold three lots of his newly approved development to Manny’s Home Builders, Inc., in 1941, then in the Grantor Index covering 1941, the entry under “Larson” will say something like “Winterhill Lots 6,7 & 8”.  Go and look at the Volume and Page number for that transaction to see the deed by which Larson sold those lots.  If Larson was one of the developers who decided to use the race-based covenants, you’ll see it in that deed.  And, I’ll bet you lunch, you’ll see it in every other deed for every other lot that Larson sells in Winter Hill.
- If I don’t see the offensive covenant in the first deed I choose to review for a given development, I will go and look at one or two other deeds in that development, using the same approach as just described, just to feel a little more confident that I’m not missing something.  
- Sticking with the “Winter Hill” example, if I don’t see the covenants in “Winter Hill” deeds, I scratch that development off my list, and I move on to the next development for which I made notes from the subdivision maps. And, I just go down the list in the same manner as described above.
- There are some additional tips and hints that I use, but the above steps essentially describe what I do.

Ali

Thanks for recommending further investigation of **68 Foxcroft Road**.

When my students and I researched restrictive covenants in West Hartford town records years ago, we looked at several addresses on Foxcroft to attempt to verify these oral accounts as told to Tracey Wilson:

By word of mouth I had heard that in the 1930s and 1940s and into the 1950s, no Roman Catholics could live on Stoner Drive, the first street developed on “the mountain.” No Catholics could buy on Wood Pond or Sunset Farms or West Hill or Sunnyreach. According to another resident, the address of a house on the corner of Foxcroft Road and Fern Street was changed to Fern Street because no Jews were allowed on Foxcroft Rd. But how many of these restrictions actually appear in West Hartford in writing and on legal documents? They have been hard to find in writing.
http://lifeinwesthartford.org/world-war-ii-era.html#high-ledge-homes-and-restrictive-covenants

We did not find anything on Foxcroft Road at that time, but I’ll add it to my list of addresses to check again when Town Hall opens up again.

Jack

On Mar 22, 2021, at 4:46 PM, Oshinskie, Ali <aoshinskie@ctpublic.org> wrote:

Thanks for the time today!

Sorry we had to hop off quickly, thanks for the time. I'll get to some sleuthing and also be in touch with some Waterbury historians. I'll let you know if I find anything.

The address I mentioned is 68 Foxcroft Road. I think you'll find it a little tricky because I think she told me they pieced together a few properties to create that larger than after one at some point.

Thanks again,
Ali


ADD from David Ware on Manchester:

- Race restrictive covenants were somewhat hidden in property deeds: "This was one of thirteen covenants, lettered A-M, that were included in every deed originally granted by Greenway Incorporated to the purchasers of properties within the subdivision.5 Placed smack in the middle of the thirteen common covenants, at letter F, this racially restrictive provision was fundamentally different from the other twelve that surrounded it. The others pertained to practical and common concerns such as limits on the size of structures, set-back requirements, prohibitions on “noxious” or unsafe industrial uses, the minimal value of homes to be built on the lots, etc. Covenant F, on the other hand, was a blatant expression of racist attitude and intent. It was textually located deep within a collection of other relatively uncontroversial restrictions, and it almost appeared to be seeking an inconspicuous situs – a place where its message, albeit unambiguous, might be muted by its less provocative neighbors. The covenant was also temporally camouflaged. That is, the exact wording of the covenant was never explicitly repeated after its first inclusion in the original deed out from Greenway in 1942. For the five conveyances that followed the first full expression of the covenant, including the conveyance to the Wares, sellers of the lot recited only that the property was “subject to restrictions of record, a sort of short-hand expression which served only to obscure the existence of all of the A-M covenants, and in particular the textually buried racial restriction of covenant F” (Ware, 2020, p. 4)

- Overall, the "vast majority of Manchester’s developers did NOT use racially restrictive covenants. Data collected from the town’s land records is telling: Out of approximately 100 subdivisions approved in Manchester between roughly 1910 and 1950, only the three mentioned above (i.e. only about 3% of the subdivisions) used such covenants. Out of approximately 7,100 residential building lots represented by those 100 subdivisions, only the 248 lots within Greenway, Lakewood Circle and Bowers (i.e. only about 3.5%) were burdened with covenants that required the exclusion of nonwhites." p15
