NEW OUTLINE

- Shortage of quality affordable housing: issue today, and also during 1930s Depression years.
- Failure of the marketplace to provide sufficient supply to meet demand
- Raised questions: if we cannot depend on private sector provide housing, should it be a government responsibility?
- Government-funded housing temporarily succeeded in Hartford due to World War II and the need to house workers and their families in wartime industries

- Many young people today are surprised to hear of a time when "public housing" was a highly desired commodity by Whites. . . Go back to 1940s/50s when housing was scarce. . . Many called for government to intervene in the private housing market by creating more publicly-funded affordable housing. . . Successful because these efforts were tied to wartime industry. . .(check and cite Picture Windows book)

- LATER? What is "public" housing? tweet by Ansley Erickson and Michael Glass on connections between government-subsidized FHA mortgages for suburban single-family homes and urban housing projects https://twitter.com/m_r_glass/status/1363679039022637056?s=12

TODO
- integrate policy and oral history from @radcliffeCharterOakTerrace1998
- integrate policy history from Rothstein, Susan Eaton Steady Habit

New Deal policy focus on private vs public housing
“The New Deal faced a choice in the housing field. It could take [John Maynard] Keynes’ advice and get behind proposals from congressional liberals like Robert Wagner for large-scale, Europeanstyle public housing programs. Or it could follow [Herbert] Hoover’s lead and seek measures to stimulate private home building and individual home ownership.” US chose latter.
[from Starchman] As Kennedy continued, the New Deal policies also highlighted the repercussions when the government fails to keep pace with the private sector, and the effect of choosing Hoover’s housing plan over Keynes’ became obvious. While one percent in the U.S. lived in public housing after WWII, nearly half the population of England and more than a third of the population of France lived in public housing.11 Those who benefited from public housing in the U.S. were often the poorest of the poor, rather than the working class, who were the most common beneficiaries of Europe’s housing reforms. What is more, Hoover’s plan supported later housing policy that allowed suburbs to make the decision not to build public housing; consequently public housing developed around core urban areas and concentrated poverty. By experimenting with public housing and subsidization, what the New Deal housing reforms did was to increase the amount of owner-occupied housing, and the impact of the FHA on the number of owners was outstanding. Whereas before the New Deal, “only about four Americans in ten lived in their own homes... By the opening of the twenty-first century, nearly 70 percent were homeowners.” @kennedyWhatNewDeal2009, cited in @starchmanStruggleMeetHousing2011

## Racially Segregated Public Housing
- Local government (Hartford Housing Authority) and federal government (US Housing Authority funding) created 3 virtually all-White housing projects and 1 (entirely?) all-Black housing project during early 1940s: Nelton Court, Dutch Point, Charter Oak Terrace for White families, and Bellevue Square for Black families
- These government decisions reportedly increased racial segregation because tenement neighborhood around Bellevue was comprised of White and Black families, but housing project was designated "for Negroes". TODO: confirm this using 1940 Census manuscript of tenement homes by race; TODO: confirm if Blacks and Whites both applied for
- These government decisions squeezed Black families into high-density projects, while other projects were lower-density. "At 199 persons per acre, Bellevue Square was, until recently, Hartford most sardine-canned piece of real estate: 501 apartments in 20 buildings on 12.57 acres -- home for 2,500 men, women, and children" @sherwoodStillSitePoor1981; compare with density and/or census tract stats for other projects
- Decisions could have been different: Stetler 1955 report shows variety of racial arrangements, but Hartford opted for Black-only @sherwoodStillSitePoor1981; "This study of racial integration in Connecticut public housing reveals significant findings with respect to racial tenancy, racial occupancy patterns, occupancy pattern rationale, interracial interaction, and interracial attitudes of tenants. The analysis is focused on 72 public housing projects located in the State's principal areas of Negro concentration, i.e., towns having more than 500 Negroes in their population." - page iii
Author born 1906 @stetlerRacialIntegrationPublic1955

HOW public housing began as slum clearance, then shifted to wartime defense

The Hartford Slum Clearance Committee reported in 1934 “the Negroes due to their low position in the social and economic groups have been forced to live in whatever tenements were abandoned and no longer desired by the white families.”
@hartfordslumclearancestudycommitteeReportSlumClearance1934
@hartfordslumclearancestudycommitteeMapPartPlan1934


HHA decides in favor of segregated public housing

North End Tenants League Will Call Mass Meeting; Opposed to Race Barriers
A mass meeting will be called by the North End Tenants League, an organization claiming to represent "more than 200 Negro families dwelling in the slum area of the North End of the city," to inquire as to whether Negroes will be barred from the projects of the HHA, specifically Dutch Point, Nelton Court, Bellevue Square
League met at home of James W. King, 188 Bellevue Street; also asks that Rev WK Hopes "Negro representative on the Housing Authority" and others give info
League says "The white and Negro people living in the same area get along very well together" and "to bar the Negro from Nelton Court and Dutch Point would be discriminatory practice" (paraphrased quote by HC)
HHA spokesman says no policy yet for Nelton Court, but "There will probably be no Negroes at the Dutch Point project" (paraphrased HC quote)
Bellevue Square not ready for at least a year but "at least 50 percent of the tenants will probably be Negroes" (HC para quote) @NegroGroupAsks1940


Hartford Negro Citizens Council protests evictions of residents at Bellevue Square site @easonPeopleForumImportant1941






1941 Defense Housing internal memo states no plans for segregated wartime housing in New England because it believes Negroes workers can be accommodated in current projects
@craneMemoClarkForeman1941

1941 Defense Housing internal memo stated that if CT defense industries hired more local Negro workers, this would eliminate bringing in out-of-state workers and would reduce housing shortage
@craneMemoTheodoreVeenstra1941

1942 US Division of Defense Housing Coordination stated it could not prioritize housing in slum sites designated for Negro housing without concrete evidence of Negro defense workers; officially rejected a Hartford 156-unit project [Nelton Court] for this reason
@StatementConcernsEffect1942

1944 US planners recognized that New England federally-funded wartime house was racially segregated;
In Hartford-area federally-funded defense housing, only 324 out of 4400 units (7 percent) were intended for or occupied by Black residents in 1944. TODO: RE-CHECK: But about half of these (156 units) were located in one project, Nelton Court, an all-Black project. Many other sites in Hartford had far fewer Black residents, such as Charter Oak Terrace housing project with only 2 Black units out of 1000. (0.2%). In suburban towns, federal projects often had 1 or fewer Black units.
Across New England states: Region Avg (for CT, ME, MA, RI, NH), 1120 out of 34171 (3 percent of federal defense housing intended for or occupied by African Americans)
@nationalhousingagencyWarHousingProgrammed1944
see 1944-negro-war-housing-table in otl-public-housing

TODO: clarify why racial data for permanent wartime housing differs between US Govt and Negro Handbook 1946-47



But public housing was not evenly located across the growing metropolitan Hartford region.
Government planners concentrated public housing in the City of Hartford.
Public housing communities often were racially segregated . . .
see Charter Oaks book
to do: map of public housing projects and racial demographics (from federal reports?)



Racial barriers and public housing
@johnsonPeopleForumAsks1957

Wilber G. Smith, president of the Hartford branch, of the NAACP, brought a plea strengthened with accusations and threats for an end to the "benign" quota to the Hartford Housing Authority Tuesday. @NAACPDemandsCity1965


FROM Coates Reparations: "In 1948, when the Supreme Court ruled that restrictive covenants, while permissible, were not enforceable by judicial action, Chicago had other weapons at the ready. The Illinois state legislature had already given Chicago’s city council the right to approve—and thus to veto—any public housing in the city’s wards. This came in handy in 1949, when a new federal housing act sent millions of tax dollars into Chicago and other cities around the country. Beginning in 1950, site selection for public housing proceeded entirely on the grounds of segregation. By the 1960s, the city had created with its vast housing projects what the historian Arnold R. Hirsch calls a “second ghetto,” one larger than the old Black Belt but just as impermeable. More than 98 percent of all the family public-housing units built in Chicago between 1950 and the mid‑1960s were built in all-black neighborhoods."

Fed allows suburbs to opt out of public housing
Public Housing: Government Ownership and Management
"For twenty-five years, beginning in 1937, low-rent public housing was the only federal program providing housing assistance to the poor. ..
The first salient characteristic to consider is the identity of the ownership of public housing. For the first twenty-eight years of the program, all federally subsidized housing units were designed, built, and managed with direct over sight by local housing authorities.
The second salient characteristic to consider is the form of the subsidy. For the first thirty-three years of the program, essentially all the capital costs of public housing were borne by the federal government. Conversely, after the construction of public housing, local authorities were required to meet all sub sequent operating expenses out of current rental income.
These two characteristics of the public housing program had far-reaching consequences. Control by local authorities meant that decisions about public housing were responsive to the political processes buffeting small units of government. Local governments, fearful that the availability of public housing would encourage an influx of the poor, could opt to not establish housing authorities, thereby preventing the building of public housing within their borders. The 1949 Housing Act, extending the public housing program originally enacted in 1937, included a requirement that local authorities' applications for funding be approved by local government. Moreover, any locality in which public housing was to be built needed a locally approved "workable program" for community development. this requirement was in force until 1969”  @quigleyDecentHomeHousing2000 p. 56, cited in @starchmanStruggleMeetHousing2011

TODO: search for more public housing in suburbs, especially during wartime, such as 28 March 1942 HC "Government Takes Over Lewis Tract" in Wethersfield (find and download)

Most suburban towns were reluctant to allow the federal government to build public housing inside their municipal boundaries. . . and when this did happen during wartime, local leaders and residents fought the federal rules to keep Af-Ams out. .. . [transition into Oakwood Acres story]


CLARIFY names of housing projects
In Aug 1943 @ApplicationsProjectRents1943 and @EnrollmentDropSeen1943

- Elmwood Acres 95% complete
- South Quaker Lane Terrace, 65 of 407 units ready
- Oakwood Acres, 60 of 198 units almost ready

SHOW location of public housing in Sanborn maps
TODO otl-public-housing

Federal payment in lieu of property taxes to town government
WHHA chair RF Jones announces negotiations with town authorities regarding "specific amount to be paid in lieu of taxes by the government for the sites... comparable to the assessment of a private housing development"
"still restricted to in-migrant essential war workers or to those who have been evicted"
@EnrollmentDropSeen1943
Wartime public housing to receive $27k payment in lieu of taxes for three federal housing projects: Elmwood Acres, Oakwood Acres, South Quaker Lane Terrace
@RealtorMayContinue1944

Women working, connecting, and organizing in federal housing
"In those days, this collection of tiny detached homes and trim duplexes was known as Elmwood Acres. Built by the federal government in 1942 on the grounds of a former dairy farm, the neighborhood provided low-rent housing to those who worked in local arms factories. After World War II, the development began welcoming returning veterans, who settled into the houses with their growing families."
..."Elmwood Acres was one of hundreds of government-subsidized communities that sprung up across the nation to house war workers and, later, returning veterans, said Bruce M. Stave, a history professor at the University of Connecticut.
"People then viewed the government as a solution to problems," Stave said. "In recent years, that attitude has changed. The government is looked upon as something that people want to get off their backs."
...Women and husbands both came to find work during war, also made lifelong friendships with neighbors
"The development housed 300 families and was managed by Edna LaRochelle, who became a sort of "den mother" to the neighborhood."
...  The women adopted a more formal name -- The Women's Club of Elmwood Acres -- and a more ambitious agenda. They organized a nursery school, donated gifts to hospital patients and lobbied the town for a traffic light at New Britain Avenue and Mayflower Street."
@altimariReunionRecallOld1996

## Resisting Public Housing in West Hartford {-}

Resistance to Public Housing and Integration during World War II
see chapter
@wilsonResistancePublicHousing2018

Suburban resistance to public housing, even when occupied by Whites
... "The newcomers weren't given the warmest welcome by the rest of West Hartford. One man who lived in an abutting neighborhood refused to allow his son to walk through Elmwood Acres on his way to school. "People resented us," LeBourgne said. "They thought the riff-raff was moving in."
@altimariReunionRecallOld1996







## Returning Public Housing to Private Sector {-}

A year before the end of World War II, US Congressmen toured public housing in Hartford region with aim to dismantle it and return housing to the private sector.
1944 Congressional Group, Impressed by Projects Here, to Recommend Policy Would Dismantle Aircraft Houses Flimsy Dwellings Having Served Purpose Held Now Valuable Only as Salvage
Representative Frank W. Boykin, Democrat, of Alabama, chairman of a subcommittee of the House Public Buildings and Grounds Committee said Monday following a tour of slum-clearance and war housing projects in Hartford, West Hartford, East Hartford and Wethersfield that he was in favor of dismantling many of the temporary projects, salvaging whatever is possible and letting private enterprises take over the job of providing adequate homes in the postwar world.
Better-built projects: Blue Hills Homes, Hartford,; Westview Homes, Wethersfield; Mayberry Village, East Hartford; Charter Oak Terrace, West Hartford [actually Hartford]. Rep Boykin favors allowing current tenants to buy units
Mistakes: North End Homes, East Hartford; Oakwood Acres, West Hartford "which are largely untenanted"; but "suitable for a man to live in"; Airport Homes, Hartford "terrible"
Slum clearance projects in Hartford: Bellevue Square; Nelton Court, Dutch Point Colony; almost fully occupied; some tenants earn $80/week and Rep Boynkin says that they should be moved out and not subsidized by the rest of the city
Greater Hartford projects compare well to other US region wartime housing projects @FavorsWarHome1944

"West Hartford’s three war housing projects, Elmwood Acres (on Elmhurst Street) with 300 units, Oakwood Acres (where Kennedy Park is today) with 335 units, and South Quaker Terrace with 159 units, (on Quaker Lane near the National Guard) all opened between 1942 and 1943. Oakwood Acres and South Quaker Terrace had a total of 494 housing units. Elmwood Acres consisted of small single-family homes and duplexes that are still inhabited.
According to the Lanham Act, when the war ended, the housing would be torn down. The Oakwood and Trout Brook Acres housing was built very quickly and was not meant to last. And, post-war, towns worried about the developments becoming low-income housing."
@wilsonShelterStorm2018

Elmwood Acres was higher-quality permanent housing that government sold off to private owners
...In 1956, the government began selling the houses for $6,000 to $7,000. Many of the residents, with growing families and upwardly mobile aspirations, left the neighborhood.
@altimariReunionRecallOld1996

"The grand list grew almost 7% from 1956 to 1957. The main factor in the grand list increase, according to the Hartford Courant, was the addition of 187 homes in Elmwood Acres housing project just south of Route 84 and east of Mayflower Street. These homes, built by the federal government during World War II as war worker housing, were sold to individual owners in 1956, adding over $1 million worth of property to the grand list. New homes, numbering 572, were also added to the list."
@wilsonPoliticalEconomicLandscape2018

## Demolition and Rebuilding of Public Housing
"Most of us think of the projects as they were in their last years: squalid, run-down, hopeless, violent, drug-infested rat holes... Stowe Village, Dutch Point, Charter Oak Terrace and Bellevue Square, as well as Nelton Court, became synonymous with crime and urban decay. If any of the people who built these projects lived long enough to see what they became, they must have cried. The second annual report of the Hartford Housing Authority, for 1940-41, describes people doing God's work. The authority was eradicating slums, giving people who before couldn't afford decent housing the apartment of their dreams, improving the city. The projects, Green observed, were all built near schools, so the families could educate their children and help them get ahead." @condonProjectsPromiseCurse2010

"One is Alan Green [HHA exec director]. He and his family lived in Rice Heights, the smaller project across from Charter Oak Terrace in the southwest part of the city. He recalls that on Saturday nights in the 1950s, the dads in the project would get a screen or a sheet, a projector, some chairs and some food, and show movies on the lawn. And he remembers seeing the dads walking to work few owned cars - at the nearby typewriter factories. "It was a wonderful life," he said. But after a decade, Alan's dad got a better job, which put the family over the income limit. They had to move. He was sad to leave. What went missing, as the years went by, were two parts of the story: "work," and not long after, "dads." The loss of those manufacturing jobs down the street, at such places as the Royal and Underwood typewriter factories (explain to your kids what a typewriter is), may be the major reason the projects went bad, but there were a host of others. Welfare rules and civil rights legislation worked to keep multiple generations of families in the projects, Green said. Suburban flight took middle-class neighbors, many businesses and even some city churches to adjoining towns. The housing project buildings, built quickly and sometimes cheaply, began to decay. Congress lowered the rents at federally funded projects in the late 1960s, making it harder for local authorities to keep them up. The projects were intended to be transitional, as they were for the Green family. When they ceased to be that, when they began to be multi-generational residences for the very poor, they changed. With no jobs, family structure broke down and the illegal economy wormed its way in. One of Green's predecessors, John Wardlaw, called the projects "concentration camps for the poor." That was in the 1990s, when Wardlaw and Mayor Mike Peters began taking down the big projects. Green now finishes their work. The last tenants at Nelton Court were moved out a month ago. The demolition of the 120 units in the worn, two-story brick buildings will begin about Dec.1. The project will be replaced by a less-dense 80 units, in attractive, side-by-side townhouses or two and three stories. They will be rental units for people with low incomes, essentially the people who live there now. So the five big federal projects from the early 1940s will all have been replaced by new housing. It's all an improvement; the housing at the former Dutch Point project is gorgeous. Will it make a difference in the end, or will a new set of city officials be tearing it down in the late 21st century, wondering why it went bad?" @condonProjectsPromiseCurse2010
