
## Removing and Rebuilding Public Housing - HERE or LATER?

PHOTO 1991-02-07-hc-mary-shepard.png saved in otl-public-housing
"Mary Shepard moved into Bellevue Square when rent was $15 a month and the Hartford public housing project consisted of two buildings and a stretch of empty land."
Mary Shepard: "I don't know that people want to go...When I move, I'm going out feet first"  says 83-year-old Georgia native, her family was 2nd to move into Bellevue Square in 1940
Some other residents want to leave due to drugs
HHA director John Wardlaw: "thinning out public housing in general" to break up concentrations of poorest residents "to provide them with safer homes and more stable neighborhoods"
Htf City Manager Gene Shipman "caused a splash late lat year when he called for demolishing public housing projects and transferring residents to the suburbs"
HHA and Wardlaw originally made proposal, who called for dispersed housing in city and suburbs
@kazalHartfordRequests101991

"Most of us think of the projects as they were in their last years: squalid, run-down, hopeless, violent, drug-infested rat holes... Stowe Village, Dutch Point, Charter Oak Terrace and Bellevue Square, as well as Nelton Court, became synonymous with crime and urban decay. If any of the people who built these projects lived long enough to see what they became, they must have cried. The second annual report of the Hartford Housing Authority, for 1940-41, describes people doing God's work. The authority was eradicating slums, giving people who before couldn't afford decent housing the apartment of their dreams, improving the city. The projects, Green observed, were all built near schools, so the families could educate their children and help them get ahead." @condonProjectsPromiseCurse2010

"One is Alan Green [HHA exec director]. He and his family lived in Rice Heights, the smaller project across from Charter Oak Terrace in the southwest part of the city. He recalls that on Saturday nights in the 1950s, the dads in the project would get a screen or a sheet, a projector, some chairs and some food, and show movies on the lawn. And he remembers seeing the dads walking to work few owned cars - at the nearby typewriter factories. "It was a wonderful life," he said. But after a decade, Alan's dad got a better job, which put the family over the income limit. They had to move. He was sad to leave. What went missing, as the years went by, were two parts of the story: "work," and not long after, "dads." The loss of those manufacturing jobs down the street, at such places as the Royal and Underwood typewriter factories (explain to your kids what a typewriter is), may be the major reason the projects went bad, but there were a host of others. Welfare rules and civil rights legislation worked to keep multiple generations of families in the projects, Green said. Suburban flight took middle-class neighbors, many businesses and even some city churches to adjoining towns. The housing project buildings, built quickly and sometimes cheaply, began to decay. Congress lowered the rents at federally funded projects in the late 1960s, making it harder for local authorities to keep them up. The projects were intended to be transitional, as they were for the Green family. When they ceased to be that, when they began to be multi-generational residences for the very poor, they changed. With no jobs, family structure broke down and the illegal economy wormed its way in. One of Green's predecessors, John Wardlaw, called the projects "concentration camps for the poor." That was in the 1990s, when Wardlaw and Mayor Mike Peters began taking down the big projects. Green now finishes their work. The last tenants at Nelton Court were moved out a month ago. The demolition of the 120 units in the worn, two-story brick buildings will begin about Dec.1. The project will be replaced by a less-dense 80 units, in attractive, side-by-side townhouses or two and three stories. They will be rental units for people with low incomes, essentially the people who live there now. So the five big federal projects from the early 1940s will all have been replaced by new housing. It's all an improvement; the housing at the former Dutch Point project is gorgeous. Will it make a difference in the end, or will a new set of city officials be tearing it down in the late 21st century, wondering why it went bad?" @condonProjectsPromiseCurse2010
