## NOTES on Origins of Zoning


Early Connecticut began as Christian colony, with no separation of church and state. After Reverend Thomas Hooker and his followers broke away from the Puritans and settled Connecticut in the 1630s, they established the Congregational Church as the seat of government in each town, and required residents to pay taxes to support its work. Despite the promise of freedom of religion in the First Amendment to the US Constitution in 1789, Connecticut did not disestablish the Congregational Church as the state religion until three decades later in 1818. That year, delegates to Connecticut's Constitutional Convention debated the topic of religious freedom, but deliberately voted to extend it only to "every society or denomination of Christians." Jews were not permitted to form their own congregations or worship publicly until 1843, when a delegation of German Jews persuaded the state legislature to grant this right by statute (though the state constitutional language remained overtly Christian until 1965).^[@dalinMakingLifeBuilding1997, pp. 10-13; @cohnCivilRightsJews2010; @hortonConnecticutStateConstitution2011, pp. 11-13; @finlayImportanceBeingPuritan2015; @furerChurchStateLand2018]

EMAIL sent 26 Feb 2021
Dear Essie Labrot, Tracey Wilson, Jennifer Matos, and WH Public Library staff:

I’m researching a 1923 conflict between West Hartford town officials and property owners who objected to granting Jacob Goldberg a permit to build a grocery store. Although Goldberg eventually won his case and opened Kingswood Market at the corner of Farmington and Ardmore Avenues, this conflict motivated West Hartford to become the first municipality in CT to adopt local zoning ordinances in 1924.

Attached are two Hartford Courant newspaper clippings that summarize events on key dates.

Can any of you help me find minutes or notes from these West Hartford public meetings, or any related source materials, that might help me reconstruct what people said?

- January 24, 1923: WH building inspector Andrew Larson holds public meeting, many property owners object to Goldberg’s plan, and Larson refuses to grant the building permit

-[added after email] March 6, 1923: WH town council reports that corporation counsel Carlyle C. Thomson and attorney John T. Robinson will defend town building inspector against legal proceedings by Goldberg's attorney. Also, J.B. Woods of the town commission favors a zoning act to protect the residential character of certain sections @DemandEconomyWest1923

- June 5, 1923: Under pressure from Goldberg’s attorney, WH town council votes to grant him the building permit

- June 29, 1923: WH town council hears objections to their previous decision, but does not revoke Goldberg’s permit


Children of David and Rachel Goldberg (unsure of birth order; some were born in Leeds, England)
Jacob Goldberg (the grocer)
Barney Goldberg (the boxer, vaudevillian, junk dealer, and owner of Barney’s office suppy store on Front Street - see Stoeckel article)
Rebecca Goldberg Siegel (owned Siegel Shop dress store; Brandeis Univ graduate?)
Celia Goldberg Pessin (nursing pioneer, first president of the Children’s Home)
Jane Goldberg Cohen (also a nurse, and her husband Hyman was in grocery business with Jacob in 1920s)
Dora Goldberg Schatz (Smith College 1916, active in Emanuel Synagogue, wife of lawyer-politician Nathan Schatz)
Hannah Goldberg Krauskopf (wonder how she managed to keep up with all of her siblings…)

## notes on Anti-Semitism or Anti-Development?

TODO: contact Donna Berman -- Years ago at the Charter Oak Cultural Center, I seem to recall seeing an historical exhibit or document on your wall about a restriction against Jews owning property on a specific street in Hartford, perhaps Scarborough Street. Does this ring a bell with you? Or is my memory getting fuzzy as I grow older? I’m asking because my Trinity student co-author and I are publishing a book chapter on race restrictive covenants in West Hartford, and we’re looking for evidence of religious covenants in the region.



My email exchanges with Jeff Murray

I agree that there is no evidence of overt anti-Semitism against Jacob Goldberg’s 1923 application to build a grocery store at Ardmore and Farmington. Based on few Hartford Courant clippings and the limited Town Council minutes, we simply don’t know much about what was spoken, or what motivated residents to object.

Q #1: I’m interested in reading more about your parallel example, where the town declined Fred Kenyon’s garage permit in 1922.




Q #2: I’m also struck how by quickly Ardmore Road developed during the early 1920s. See city directory listings in the attached Excel file, which shows 1 household in 1922, 13 in 1923, 34 in 1924, 41 in 1925, etc. I agree that many Jewish families moved to Ardmore Road by 1926, but I wonder if the “first wave” of homeowners in 1923 (who do not appear to be Jewish) may have objected to rapid housing development *and* a rapid increase in Jewish neighbors around them, particularly amid the national context of anti-immigration and anti-Semitism. Your thoughts?

Q #3: Your list below of Jewish residents of Ardmore Road in 1926 has some overlap with my list from Geer’s city directory, but also contains some different names (Stein, Gendler, Vogel). Would you please point me to your source?
By 1922-1926, residents on Ardmore Road included Harry Stein, Jacob Gendler, Max Winters, Martin Vogel, Hattie Cohen, William R. Kuhn, Nathan F. Rivkin, Minnie Weisberg, Benjamin Golding, and Bertha Weiner. While not in 1923 only, there were 37 unique families on Ardmore Road between 1920 and 1926 and just by name alone, 10 of them were Jewish.

Jeff Murray on established Jewish residents on east side of West Hartford in 1910s: "east of North Quaker Lane, was an even more established neighborhood with Jewish owners as early as 1910. Fred Blanchard bought land at the northeast corner of Farmington Ave and North Quaker Lane, and laid out over 120 lots in 1909. One of the first people who bought a lot and built a house there on Vanderbilt Road was Max Myers, who bought the site of the synagogue almost 15 years later (see both attached sources 1 and 2), and lived there until he died (source 3). The 1917 atlas below also shows this neighborhood and there are other Jewish names early enough in that area's development, like Milton Simon on North Quaker, Aage Cohn on Walkley, and Henrietta Asheim, whose family ended up building and owning the house there at 758 Farmington Ave until at least the 1950s"


Jeff Murray: The first houses on Ardmore weren't built until the summer of 1921 and the street didn't even have access to a water main extension until fall 1922. Most building permits were issued after July 1922. See the attached real estate records, with the acknowledgment that the dates involved are when they were filed in the town clerk's office and would have actually been sold 2-4 months prior, at least from my experience with the Courant having a relatively long delay in reporting them:
* Real Estate 1 - Harry Stein and Jacob Gendler to Max S. Winters (filed Feb. 1923)
* Real Estate 2 - Martin Nilson to Martin H. Vogel (filed Jun. 1923)
* Real Estate 3 - Fred Kenyon to Milton Lashin et al (filed Apr. 1924)


Q #4: I’ve read accounts of 1920s anti-Semitism in Hartford, such as barriers against Jewish doctors at Hartford Hospital and St. Francis, and against Jewish lawyers at many law firms, etc. There’s a very interesting 1974 oral history interview with Rabbi Abraham Feldman where he describes West Hartford as a “closed community politically” for Jews when he arrived in 1925. Can you point me to any additional sources behind your statement below?

While there absolutely were cases of anti-Semitic opposition in West Hartford in the 1920s...




## transition to zoning policy to "protect" town

West Hartford town leaders' dispute with Jacob Goldberg energized their previous efforts to regulate land-use policy in their fast-growing suburb through a zoning ordinance.


WH town officials began lobbying CT legislature for zoning enabling bill in 1922. Someone in CT reportedly copied text from model zoning bill by Sec Hoover in US Commerce Dept, which CT legislature passed in Spring 1923.



West Hartford was the first suburb to enact municipal zoning in mid-1920s, which established house and lot size requirements that effectively created wealth boundaries for prospective homebuyers.

first report from Zoning Commission led by chair Josiah B Woods; praise for 1924 report by consultant Robert Whitten, who "considered not only the town as a whole with its local elements, but also the surrounding region which contributes factors entering into the proper solution of this problem" p 105 @westhartfordReportZoningCommission1924


## Chapter or book thesis
During the 1920s, several states granted local governments a new policy tool—known as municipal zoning—to exert greater control over land development. But tools can be used to achieve different goals. We can use them to help people or cause harm. Evaluating the history of zoning requires a closer look at how local governments implemented this policy, and to what ends.

Eventually....Exclusionary zoning prevailed in suburbia because its color-blind language substituted wealth barriers in place of racial barriers.

Connecticut towns have a long history of using restrictive tools to divide communities by race, class, and other factors. Although municipal zoning policies were originally designed to protect the health of citizens, they deserve closer scrutiny because of harmful exclusions.

I used to think that local zoning ordinances were boring. But Connecticut has taught me that exclusionary zoning lines are one of the most powerful dividers among the people of this state.

his history stretches back to the 1920s, when virtually all-white suburbs such as West Hartford wanted to divide neighborhoods into upper-income single family homes versus low-middle income multifamily homes and apartment buildings.







## Why US outlawed race zoning but embraced wealth zoning
" Early in the 20th century, many American communities enacted zoning ordinances requiring block-by-block racial segregation. Between 1910 and 1917, these racial zoning ordinances were upheld in more than 15 State courts. In 1917, however, the Supreme Court of the United States, in Buchanan v. Warley, declared these ordinances unconstitutional." [@unitedstatescommissiononcivilrightsUnderstandingFairHousing1973]

ADD: Manville's interpretation: "R1 first proliferated after the Supreme Court struck down racial zoning in 1917’s Buchanan v. Warley decision. Buchanan made single-family mandates appealing because they maintained racial segregation without racial language. Forcing consumers to buy land in bulk made it harder for lower income people, and therefore most non-White people, to enter affluent places. R1 let prices discriminate when laws could not (Trounstine, 2018; Weiss, 1987). Contemporary observers denounced this regime of backdoor segregation, but in 1926 the Supreme Court upheld it. In Village of Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co. (1926), the court tacitly excused R1’s implicit racism by validating its explicit classism. Cities could prohibit apartments, the court said, because apartments were nuisances: “mere parasites” on the value and character of single-family homes. In Euclid’s wake, R1 became a quiet weapon of the White and wealthy in their campaign to live amid but not among the non-White and poor (Danielson, 1976; Rothstein, 2017; Trounstine, 2018)." ^[@manvilleViewpointItTime2019, p. 2]

ALSO: Data Feminism (2020) ch2 note 5: "Buchanan v. Warley, a 1917 legal case heard before the US Supreme Court, declared that a race-based zoning ordinance in Kentucky was unconstitutional. But many states and cities, as well as private communities, continued to implement other laws and covenants that would effectively exclude certain inhabitants on the basis of race. See Christopher Silver, “The Racial Origins of Zoning in American Cities,” in Urban Planning and the African American Community: In the Shadows, ed. June Manning Thomas and Marsha Ritzdorf (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1993), 23–42."

## Progressive zoning

Progressive advocates saw zoning as a necessary tool for government to regulate the free market and to protect the health and safety of its citizens. For example, zoning gave municipalities the power to draw lines on the land and create separate spaces for residential, commercial, and industrial development. Family homes could be legally separated from potentially harmful businesses or factories.

When the Connecticut General Assembly approved zoning enabling law in 1923, it stated that local regulations should be designed for this purpose: ". . .to prevent a close arrangement or constructions of buildings upon the streets, to secure safety from fire and other dangers, to avoid undue concentration of population and to provide health, comfort and general welfare in living and working conditions."[TODO: Check original source; cited in @whittenWestHartfordZoning1924, p. 8.]

When the Connecticut General Assembly allowed towns to enact local zoning ordinances in 1923, the stated purpose was ". . .to prevent a close arrangement or construction of buildings upon the streets, to secure safety from fire and other dangers, to avoid undue concentration of population and to provide health, comfort and general welfare in living and working conditions."[@PlansApportionPopulation1923] But some town governments crafted what we now call “exclusionary zoning” policies to achieve other, less innocent goals, such as preventing certain types of residents from moving into selected neighborhoods.


But local governments often crafted zoning ordinances to achieve other, less innocent goals, such as writing rules that made housing construction in selected neighborhoods affordable only for upper-class families, thereby blocking out lower-income families.
We call this "exclusionary zoning" today and its roots can be traced back nearly a century ago.

West Hartford became the first Connecticut town to enact municipal zoning in 1924, immediately after the state granted this power. Town leaders hired Robert Whitten, a consultant from Cleveland, Ohio, to guide this process. He drafted West Hartford's first zoning guidelines, which emphasized how these land-use laws would bring "orderliness" and "efficiency" to real estate development in this rapidly growing suburb, "and an increase of health, comfort and happiness for all people."[@whittenWestHartfordZoning1924, preface] But Whitten also recommended a system of dividing residential areas by minimum home construction sizes, to effectively segregate citizens by social class. In the most exclusive A district, constructing a single-family home required the largest size property lot (at least 9,000 square feet, or 1/5 of an acre), and building a two-family home required twice as much land. Similar rules mandated the minimum width of the property facing the street. The 1924 zoning plan clearly stated that these rules "will under most conditions, make it uneconomic to build two-family houses" in the A district. Exclusionary zoning required more land per family, which increased home prices to levels that only wealthier residents could afford. While zoning did not explicitly ban lower-class citizens, it effectively pushed them downward to the D-level districts (which permitted two-family duplexes with lower minimum property sizes), or out of the suburb entirely. Under the new zoning law, Hartford's tenement houses and apartment buildings, crowded with working-class families, would be "effectively prevented in West Hartford."[@whittenWestHartfordZoning1924, p. 10]

### Explore the Source: West Hartford Zoning Plan, 1924
1924-Whitten-page10-underlined.pdf
http://magic.lib.uconn.edu/magic_2/raster/37840/hdimg_37840_155_1924_unkn_CSL_1_p.pdf

View interactive map of West Hartford zoning, 1924 at
http://magic.lib.uconn.edu/otl/dualcontrol_zoning_westhartford.html

Drafting local ordinances this way made zoning an exclusionary tool to restrict neighborhoods by wealth, and most likely to pump up high-end real estate sales. Unlike other tools developed around the same time (such as racially restrictive property covenants that prohibited non-white residents, and have since been outlawed by civil rights legislation), class-based zoning remains perfectly legal today.  But it does nothing to promote the health and safety of the citizenry, as promised by the original intent of the state law.

While race-based housing restrictions have been banned by 1940s-60s civil rights laws, class-based exclusionary zoning remains perfectly legal today, despite doing nothing to promote the health and safety of citizens as promised by the stated goal of the 1924 law.



While local officials proposed zoning on the grounds of health, safety, and manageable growth [CHECK?], local representatives and residents maneuvered it to stratiffy housing values through seemingly-neutral spatial requirements, making it another government-sponsored tool to limit “undesirable” neighbors. .
MODIFY: Although some Whites drew a racial and religious lines to keep “undesirable” Blacks, Jews, and Catholics out of selected city and suburban neighborhoods, they gradually replaced these practices with wealth-based restrictions in property deeds and municipal zoning, making exclusion less overt, but still effective. . .. Zoning became a socially acceptable (and legally supported) means of using income as proxy to keep undesirable elements at distance. Zoning proponents included progressive supporters of separating residential neighborhoods from factories and industrial zones. But in Hartford’s suburbs, zoning also became effective means to distance the haves from the have-nots.

Nationally, the rise of municipal zoning occurred during 1920-1940s, see Marc Weiss 1987; zoning laws ("regulated the use, height, and bulk of structures on urban land", p4); subdivision regulations  ("imposed minimum standards of lot size, street width and alignment...", p4) [on 'growth coalition' private-public cooperation], author cites William Munro, "A Danger Spot in the Zoning Movement" Annauls of American Academy of Political and Social Science, 155 II, May 1931, p203, on Zoning as "the ultimate promotional device, a form of government-subsidized free advertising", p99 here: "Zoning, however, quickly became popular. Hardly anyting else in municipal administration has had so rapid a spread int he cities of the United States during the past fifteen years. And one of the principal reasons can be found int eh fact tha treal estaet agents and promoters throughout the coutnry got behidn the movement. They saw in it an opportunity to boom their busienss. With a city entirely zoned, they could assure purchasers of residential property that hteir neighborhoods would enve be encoruached upon by business, while ont he other hand, zoning woudl give busienss propety a touch of monopoly value. Accordingly the signs went up on vacant lots: 'Zoned for business' or 'Zoned for apartements,' with the definite implication that such action on the part of the public authorities had resulted in giving the property a higher and more assured value than it would otherwise have." [*check quote from Munro 1931 in JStor?]; But Weiss’ book only briefly mentions schools, and only as a desirable outcome of public policy by private market community planners, with no direct evidence on the role of schooling in the equation]

In contrast to overt discrimination, towns like Avon [and WH?] began to exercise more subtle means of exclusion and homogenization through legal tools of zoning, taxation, and services. According to Downs, "...all suburbs have one major advantage regarding cultural homogeneity that is not shared by larger cities: suburban residents can make use of legal machinery to maintain their homogeneity by excluding those who may change it. Of course, they cannot directly prevent any particular group from entering by passing discriminatory laws but they can set up and enforce specific standards regarding building quality, tax rates, the character of public services, and the nature of the school system. By raising these standards high enough, they can make it economically impossible for 'disrupting' elements to enter the area and dilute the homogeneity which they seek to establish" p315 (quoted in Ladd, Ideology in America), source: Anthony Downs, "Metropolitan Growth and Future Political Problems." Land Economics 37 (1961): 311-20.





## West Hartford leaders push for zoning
West Hartford town officials pushed hard for the state legislature to pass a zoning bill. In 1922, amid the greatest year of residential building in WH (and state of CT), WH town plan commission appointed councilmember Josiah B Woods to chair the WH zoning cmte. Woods called upon town council to support a zoning bill in the state legislature, explaining that its purpose [indirect quote[ was “to protect the residential character of certain sections” of town. The text of the bill was copied from a model bill by US Commerce Dept [clarify that this is not US Chamber of Commerce, as one story reported], explained WH corporation counsel CC Thomson. -- 19230307HC ; Legislature cities & borough cmte held hearing in March 1923 and hear no opposition to measure. -- 19230319HC (with photo of a very young looking JB Woods); Woods explained {indirect quote] that “there is no intention to damange the individual property owner.” Rather, the idea behind the bill “is to control the exploitation of property so that men who buy expensive dwellings in West Hartford will not suffer depreciation of their property because of the erection of stores or apartment houses.” -- 19230319HC;  US Dept of Commerce zoning advisory commission, led by Sec Hoover, published a “Zoning Primer” that argues that sufficient caselaw supports court enforcement of land use regulations “as a reasonable exercise of the police power for the public health, safety and general welfare’.” -- 19230319HC

Brief bio on Joshia B Woods: Republican, lived in WH beginning around 1917; Amherst graduate and member of Asylum Hill Congregational Church -- 19240331HC
CT legislature passes zoning enabling act in spring 1923 -- 	 In Connecticut legislature passed a law that enabled local municipalities to enact zoning in spring 1923) TO DO: Research CT statute and legislative history that enabled zoning, see also HCH for specific articles

WH appointed JB Woods to chair zoning cmte, and hired consultant Robert Whitten (from Cleveland) to prepare detailed zoning plan, Zoning Plan for West Hartford Announced by Town Commission; would direct future growth on broad lines; divide town into residence, business, and industrial districts; orderly development as population increases; West Hartford will be first town in CT to complete zoning regulations after careful study; WH and nine other urbanized areas were granted approval to do zoning; US Commerce Sec Herbert Hoover says nearly 200 cities and towns across US have adopted zoning ---- 19240309HC

Currently, Whitten’s plan is tentative and for discussion only;  Report quoted here [CHECK ORIGINAL] : “the primary function of West Hartford is the housing of peoplee who will have their work in Hartford. This housing will need to serve all classes and all grades of economic ability. . . factory workers, office employees, and the various business and professional groups.” -- 19240309HC; Most WH residents came “to get away from the increasing congestion in Hartford or because thy were attraced by the comfort and beauty of the open residential sections,  . . .[which] only by zoning that it can be permanently preserved.” -- ; separate industrial, commercial, and residential areas; not retroactive, and no affecting existing covenants between private parties 19240309HC

But the zoning plan clearly divided residential property, and its inhabitants, by economic divisions.  Report quotes in newspaper (check original): “The residence districts are further sub-divided into what for practices purposes might be called single family dwelling districts, two-family dwelling districts, and apartment house districts.” Zones A (min lot area 9000 sq ft) and B (6000 sq ft) would “make it uneconomic to build two family houses”; Zone C (see original) designed for two-family houses (3600 sq ft ???); D (1500 sqft) and E (750 sq ft) are designed for apartment houses; Most of WH’s undeveloped land is zoned as A or B, which would ‘assume a single family development throughout this entire area” though “unwise to impose any rigid rule of this kind” and envisions some two-family, group houses, and even apartment houses to come --19240309HC; formally adopted (with some modifications listed) -- 19240324HC

## West Hartford leaders on successful zoning and its expansion
WH zoning declared to be successful by end of its first year. A 1924 overview of town progress noted that zoning plan “has already proved of great benefit, and hs caused a large increase in land values.” Town also planning out sewer lines, and also notes progress of school system --19250105HC;

State legislature considers bill to make uniform zoning through entire state (and repeal current bill that specifies only West Hartford and a few other towns??) -- 19250326HC CTLeg cmte hearing zoning; CT adopts new zoning regs, which are more comprehsnvie than enabling act of 1923, by placing zoning power in town council instead of zoning commission -- 19250606HC CTLeg modifies zoning enabling act

WH eventually approved more restrictive zoning laws that went beyond original guidelines. In 1927, the WH town council voted to ban construction of apartment buildings in Section A and B residential zones, even if it met the minimum lot size per family.  Dispute arose over building permits issued to 6-family and 12-family units to be built by Bartletter-brainard Company at corner of Prospect Ave and Fern Street [these appear to be upscale units?]. Real estate developer Mr. Aubrey Maddock pointed out that such a large percentage of WH land is zoned A or B, and that existing lot size laws would maintain beauty, and that council should not “shut the door to apartment houses because they will raise the grand list” and bring funds into town to reduce tax rate; Councilman Barton criticized real estate dealer, and council voted unanimously in favor of ban -- 19270326HC WH bans apartment residential zoning. See also 19270214HC WH considers ban apartment residential zone; 19270403HC WH ban apartments in residential zoning; 19270424HC Realtors discuss apartments WH Hartford

## Compare with zoning elsewhere in Hartford region
HCH searched “West Hartford” and “zoning” from 1923 thru 1927
19240309HC
19251213HC
19260831HC
19341022HC


## Contrast late or little zoning in built-out City of Hartford
By contrast, in the City of Hartford, retroactively zoning residential, commercial, and industrial development  would be extremely difficult and unwise, says expert; 19251213HC

## Zoning in Bloomfield
Bloomfield also began to study zoning in late 1920s
Bloomfield special meeting on zoning commission and water lines; 19260831HC
Bloomfield's Popularity As City's New Suburb Gains Hold in Hartford; Jun 17, 1928 HC, page B6



In other suburban towns, residents strongly opposed zoning laws. At an East Hartford public meeting in 1927, all but two of the 75 present spoke against town zoning ordinance, seeking to repeal it.  Goerge Goodwin, a member of the EH zoning commission, acknowedged that zoning laws “were enacted whiel some misunderstood them. Many have told me that the zoning code was adopted here 10 or 15 years too late; that the laws are being enforced too late and after the damage has been done.”  A resident of West Hartford, who attended on behalf of a local resident, explained that zoning in his town had [indirect quote] “been the cause of an inordinate assessment and lax levy on certain land here” which caused some property owners to sell at a loss and leave town due to what they viewed as unreasonable property taxes.  -- 19270901HC EH opposition to zoning

Link: Dual map: Compare West Hartford zoning maps, 1924-onward
Design notes: untitled
Design notes: 1924, 1930, 1951 WH zoning maps need to be uploaded to WMS, and I have requested TIFF re-scans of 1960-70-88 zoning maps. Since some changes are subtle, I will need to insert clickable list of areas of interest (see my notes), and perhaps Curtis can help me to roughly measure/estimate the amount of land in selected areas that changed classification.
WH zoning analysis
1924 to 1930 changes: most notable is that Rockledge area (south of Park/Sedgwick, west of Troutbrook shifts from B to A grade, and development appears with new streets added in 1930)

WH town council adopts new zoning May 6, 1946, expanding A-E range to AAA, AA, A, B, C, D, G residence district; revisions on map up to 1951 shows changes from 1930 such as:
much of the B-grade land in southwest area (Wood Pond) has been shifted to A-grade
most of north and northwest section has shifted from A to AA grade
most of area west of Bishop’s Corners shifted from B grade to AA grade
area around Hartford golf club shifted from B grade to AA grade
see decreasing or degrading residential area on southeast side, bordering Hartford
TO DO: Need WH zoning office descriptions of 1930 legend (which I suspect is same as 1924) and 1951 legend (shifting to AAA); look also for HC or WHN articles around May 6 1946

Comparing the relative influence of different barriers
Transform this into a future research question, rather than a definitive statement:
REVISE TO MAKE GENERAL COMPARISONS for Hartford region (since I cannot do empirical results here), and show how similar or different to published research elsewhere. . . . . How influential were these factors -- racial & religious lines, zoning, and redlining -- in shaping neighborhood property values during the mid-twentieth century? In turn, how much did they contribute to fiscal disparities across local school districts during this period? Building on Amy Hillier’s (2003, 2005) use of historical GIS to analyze samples of individual home transactions in the city of Philadelphia (but not its suburbs), this study will contrast the influence of redlining and zoning on property values from 1930s to 1960s/70s. Furthermore, the consequences of both housing policies will be extended to school finance inequality, by comparing the degree to which rising property values in one school district boosted its tax capacity relative to other districts (Orfield 2002). Key sources for this analysis include our maps above and samples of housing value data from town assessors’ offices, and school district fiscal data compiled since the 1940s.
	 Second, follow [the implication of] effects of differences in taxable property values (town grand property lists) on school tax dollars per student. [to be discussed further in later chapter]

While government played a fundamental role in creating and maintaining color line, zoning, redlining, managing tax dollars, the free market linked suburban private home sales to public school access.


## XTRAS

Fascinating! I wish I could (wish I shall) find similar detail behind Woodbridge’s first zoning ordinance. Hoover’s group started work in 1921 and published a first draft in 1922, if I remember correctly, so cribbing text wouldn’t have been at all impossible. Still think it a bit odd that CT isn’t listed among those who “used the standard act wholly or in part in their laws…” by 1925. New Haven enacted zoning in 1926 and had two very chatty newspapers, but they are, sadly, not indexed. Cheers, Mary Dean
