## compare paragraphs from CT Explored with Bringing chapter

**Bringing Zoning to West Hartford**

In the aftermath of the Goldberg controversy West Hartford leaders lobbied Connecticut legislators for a law allowing local governments to enact zoning ordinances to control future land development. Town council member Josiah Woods urged suburban residents to support a zoning bill, based on Herbert Hoover's national model, "to protect the residential character" of designated areas. In 1923, when the Connecticut General Assembly voted for "An Act Concerning Zoning in Certain Cities and Towns" – which initially granted local powers to only seven municipalities across the state -- West Hartford moved quickly to become Connecticut's first municipality to design and enact its local zoning ordinance.

The West Hartford Town Council appointed Josiah Woods to chair its zoning commission in mid-1923 and hired consulting services from two nationally prominent experts: zoning attorney Edward Bassett and urban planner Robert Whitten. Their plan for West Hartford not only separated industrial, commercial, and residential areas, as zoning had been commonly defined. Instead, they went further by using zoning to economically segregate residential areas through minimum-land rules that favored neighborhoods with more expensive single-family homes and physically distanced them from less expensive multi-family housing and apartment buildings.

Whitten crafted the 1924 _West Hartford Zoning_ report to blend the soft rhetoric of inclusion with hard rules of exclusion. The introduction promised that zoning would bring "orderliness" and "efficiency" to the town's rapid growth, with "an increase of health, comfort and happiness for all people." It recognized that the suburb's primary function was to provide housing for people who worked in the adjacent city of Hartford and to serve "all classes and all grades of economic ability," including "factory workers, office employees, and the various business and professional groups." But deep inside the body of the report, Whitten devised a system to sort residents into economically segregated, homogeneous neighborhoods.

Whitten's zoning plan divided West Hartford into five residential areas—A, B, C, D, and E—based on new rules that required a minimum amount of land per family to construct housing. The most exclusive A zones were designated for upper-income single-family homes because they required at least 9,000 square feet of land (1/5 of an acre) per family. At the opposite end were the C, D, and E zones, set aside for more affordable multi-family duplexes, triples, and apartments, where the rules required significantly less land per family. Additional rules increased the amount of land needed to build in more exclusive areas: A-zone homes could occupy no more than 30 percent of the property lot and must be 60 feet wide on the street-facing side. While these 1920s rules may seem modest by today's standards, Whitten recommended nearly twice the amount of land per family in West Hartford's most exclusive zone compared to similar zones in Cleveland and Atlanta because Connecticut's suburbs offered more space for large-lot zoning requirements.

Overall, West Hartford's 1924 zoning formula relied on minimum-land rules to create separate neighborhoods for expensive single-family homes and affordable multi-family homes, and to physically distance these residents from each other. The 1924 report clearly stated its objectives. Zoning policy would make it "uneconomic to build two-family houses" in A and B areas because real estate developers needed to buy twice as much land compared to the amount needed for a single-family home. Given the same land costs, developers would generate more profits by building and selling two single-family homes, rather than one two-family home. While "three-family houses and apartment s houses are not prohibited in the A, B, or C area districts," the report clarified that zoning would influence the marketplace by removing incentives to build mixed-income housing. In short, the new rules rewarded developers who built economically exclusionary neighborhoods.

Exclusionary zoning was designed to sharply reduce the amount of multi-family housing that developers would build. Although West Hartford's zoning plan did not prohibit multi-family housing, it pushed lower-income families into lower-rated C, D, and E areas—the only zones where duplexes, triples, and apartments could be constructed economically—which sharply limited the supply of affordable housing in the suburb. The 1924 _West Hartford Zoning_ report cautioned readers about multi-family housing taking over suburban space that should be reserved for single-family homes. It featured photographs with captions warning that "large apartment houses are spreading farther west along Farmington Avenue and into side streets," the same areas as the Goldberg grocery store controversy the year before.. Through minimum-land rules, the report promised that "crowded tenement house conditions [that] exist in many larger communities," such as the city of Hartford, "will be effectively prevented in West Hartford." Words and images in the report were clearly intended to stir up anxieties among suburban homeowners about multi-family urban tenements and their "undesirable" occupants.
