## compare paragraphs from CT Exp with Expanding chapter

**Expanding Zoning Across Connecticut**

Although Connecticut's 1923 state law initially justified zoning because of public health and welfare concerns, West Hartford leaders and their consultants refined its purpose to attract higher-income homebuyers and protect their property values. Suburban leaders quickly embraced zoning as a legally defensible strategy that enabled local governments to segregate or exclude what they viewed as "undesirable" urban influences—on the basis of wealth—without directly referring to their race, religion, or nationality. In this way, zoning became a powerful and long-lasting tool of government-sponsored housing discrimination that continues to the present day.

After Connecticut legislators allowed town governments to enact zoning regulations in 1923, local land-use policies spread quickly across the state. While each town made its own decisions, the growth of zoning was tracked by the Connecticut Development Commission, a state agency created in 1939 to promote economic growth and efficient planning for industry and housing. The commission published a series of maps to illustrate the growth of local planning and zoning agencies in Connecticut. Towns that enacted local zoning policies tended to be clustered in the rapidly growing suburbs around the state's major cities of Hartford, Bridgeport, and New Haven. By 1957, 77 percent (131 out of 169) of town governments had established some type of planning and/or zoning agency. Nearly every town within a 20-mile radius of Hartford—including outlying rural areas far from the city center—enacted some type of land-use agency to exert control over what kind of housing could be built in their community.

During the 1950s suburban towns began to compete against one another by establishing more exclusive zoning requirements – such as a minimum of 87,000 square feet of land (about 2 acres) to construct a single-family home – to attract higher-income homebuyers. Similarly, many suburban towns began to expressly prohibit the construction of more affordable multi-family homes to keep out lower-income residents. Uncovering the roots of our state's zoning history helps us understand present-day political battles to end exclusionary practices, led by statewide advocacy groups such as the Connecticut Fair Housing Center, the Open Communities Alliance, and Desegregate Connecticut.
