### Is Zoning Racist? {-}

START with 2021 Woodbridge and parallel to 1970s West Hartford, or vice versa

## Ellsworth Grant West Hartford 1970s
find quote: West Hartford 1970s mayor Ellsworth Grant says no racial discrimination; blacks and puerto ricans simply can't afford to live here;
first, his words ignored racial steering....
second, his words ignored WH's intentional use of exclusionary zoning to keep out affordable multi-family housing...

Finish with 1970s WH mayor quote
FROM EI FAIR HOUSING AT ITS WORST
Sec 24: Profiles and comments on economics/housing
1973 EI survey shows only 100 low income family units of public housing (with 21 minority families) in all suburban towns in Cap Region, but 2680 such units in Hartford (with 2331 minority families); 99% of all minority families in low income public housing are in Hartford low income housing p130
Ellsworth Grant, Mayor WH “matter of economics” (minorities not welcome, but it’s economic) quote; 18 Oct 1973 p130
**Report counters this mythical “neutral ‘color-blind’ barrier” of economics” economic barrier:
Table shows number of moderately valued homes (less than $25k in 1970) in several towns, and percentage increase in value over decade) ****
“The fact is that there are more than 10 moderately valued homes in the suburbs (*less than $25,000) in the suburbs for every one such home in the City of Hartford, but there are almost 7 black individuals in the City for every one black individual in the suburbs. Why don’t minorities just buy these cheaper homes if de facto segregation is merely ‘a matter of economics’?” p131
“The answer is: Most of the moderately priced homes (particularly those ‘cheaper’ homes in expensive neighborhoods) never get into the newspaper advertisements or through the MLS channels in time for minority home buyers to be aware of them. Real estate agents and companies keep formal (written) or informal (mental) lists of customers wanting $25-$30,000 homes and quickly negotiate the sale bad on privileged information, social contacts, family relationships, etc. Minority families are not on these formal or informal lists. Clearly, it is not the price of homes that locks blacks out of suburbs.” **** p131
Also, people locked into city could not invest in suburban property that appreciated twice as high a rate as city property p131


While a century has passed since West Hartford and other Connecticut towns first enacted local zoning laws in 1924, conflicts have heated up in recent years, largely due to legal and political activism by leading organizations such as CT OCA and DesegregateCT... [describe]...  
A recurring question arises in debates between advocates of change and defenders of current policy: *Is zoning racist*?  
Example from news coverage of Woodbridge [describe...]  
"Residents and some of the zoning commissioners have expressed outrage that those asking for zoning overhaul are describing the town as racist. 'You[r application] essentially called Woodbridge a bunch of racists,' town commissioner Paul Schatz said in February... The team from the Yale clinic and Open Communities Alliance, however, has said the town has had decades to do the right thing---and that its inaction has had an impact on who can live in Woodbridge. While not explicitly racist, the zoning rules are having a disparate impact on Black and Latino people, they said."... 'Woodbridge’s zoning restrictions over the decades have driven up housing costs, and these high costs exclude many Black and Hispanic families and keep Woodbridge whiter and wealthier than the surrounding region. And so, when Woodbridge stays the same, Woodbridge stays segregated,' Anderson said. 'It doesn't have to be this way'."
^[@rabethomasHowOneBike2021]

Fair-housing advocates distinguish between the *intent* versus the *impact* of zoning laws, and historical analysis can provide some deeper insights:

First, looking back at the history of Connecticut's zoning laws in the 1920s, there is no direct evidence of *intent* to discriminate by race, religion, or nationality... In fact, zoning lawyers such as Edward Bassett ensured that overtly discriminatory labels were removed in order for zoning to survive courtroom challenges...

Second, despite its "color-blind" language, Connecticut's zoning policies from 1920s onward have clear *intent* to exclude by access to wealth. Best evidence of exclusionary zoning is minimum-land rules that favored higher-price single-family housing on large property lots, and prohibited more-affordable multi-family housing or made it uneconomic for developers to build. Even though Connecticut state law justified zoning on basis of public health and welfare, local governments gave no such reasoning when they originally drew up min-land rules in 1920s-50s, prior to pro-environmental justifications of more recent decades....

Third, exclusionary zoning of the 1920s in towns such as West Hartford expressed *intent* to block urban influences from entering suburb through *coded* language. Best evidence is photos of apartment buildings that were designed to scare suburban residents about the "undesirable" types of people who lived in them.... such as immigrants..... By its nature, coded language is partially hidden, not meant to be clearly identifiable, and plausibly deniable by author. But looking back through historical lenses at the anti-Jewish and anti-immigrant context of the 1920s, the *coded* language of Whitten's West Hartford report stands out... zoning was intended to protect current residents by attract upper-income families and keeping out lower-income...

Fourth, historical lens also reveals the relative absence of race in the 1920s-1950s zoning debates in the overwhelmingly White towns of suburban Hartford. (Different from proposed racial zoning in Atlanta, for example.) During this period, White town leaders and property owners who supported them used zoning primarily for *economic exclusion*, as a powerful legal tool to physically and socially distance neighborhoods by wealth, to separate the *haves* from the *have-nots*. In suburban Hartford, we see little evidence that zoning was used for *racial exclusion* prior to 1953 Custis case, because White towns relied on other tools of housing discrimination, such as racial steering and refusal to show property by real estate agents who belong to board (TODO: cite earlier chapter), to keep out the relatively small number of middle-class Blacks and Latinos who had funds and desire to buy homes in White suburbs.

Fifth, the long-term *impact* of zoning becomes clearer when seen through historical lenses. During the 1920s-50s, suburbs such as WH, Bloomfield, Avon created economically exclusionary zoning.... and those rules have shaped nearly a century of who benefits from rising property values, and who can afford to live where. White middle-class families that bought homes in suburbs protected by economically exclusionary zoning benefitted financially over time, which contributes to the White-Black wealth gap today..... In the US today, Black and Latino families have less wealth than White families, on average, which means that economically exclusionary zoning policies have a disproportionate *racial impact*.

[TODO: summarize answer to question "is zoning racist" by using historical insights on intent, coding, and impact...]


### fit Custis story into Is Zoning Racist section

Black middle-class homeowners sometimes faced suburban zoning obstacles that led them to question whether or not they were treated fairly. In the early 1950s, Lemuel and Ione Custis lived in Hartford's North End and belonged to one of the city's best-known Black families. Lemuel's father, Charles Leslie Custis, was born into slavery in Virginia and later moved to Hartford in 1882 after reading that the city of 45,000 people had 13 banks. "I decided right then and there that if Hartford had to have all those banks to take care of the money people had, it must be a good place to live," Charles reasoned. He eventually secured a job as a nighttime elevator operator at the Aetna Life Insurance Company in 1888, where company president Morgan G. Bulkeley was impressed with his "courtesy and judgment" and later appointed him as the receptionist in the executive offices. His son Lemuel graduated from Hartford Public High School and Howard University, then returned to Hartford to become the city's first Black police officer in 1939. During World War II, Lemuel graduated in the first class of Black aviators known as the Tuskegee Airmen, flew more than 90 combat missions, and received the Distinguished Flying Cross for heroism. Ione, his wife, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, and both of them held positions in the Connecticut state government. Like many White middle-class couples, they dreamed about owning a single-family home in the suburbs.^[@CustisAetnaLife1950; @PolicemanGraduatesFlying1942; @CustisListingsPrice1953; @IoneCustisObituary1991; @filloHumbleManWho2005; @sokolAllEyesAre2014, pp. 62-63]

TODO: Add photo of Lemuel, and note absence of photos of Ione

In 1951, Lemuel and Ione Custis purchased vacant land to construct a home home in Wethersfield, a nearly all-White suburb located south of Hartford. At first, the town government designated their land as a B-zone with minimum-land *and* minimum-floorspace requirements. They hired an architect to draw up plans for a two-story house to meet these requirements, with 750 square feet on the first floor and 720 square feet on the second floor, for a total of 1,470 interior square feet. The town granted them a building permit. However, before construction began, the town re-zoned their area to A-1 and raised the minimums to 900 square feet on the first floor and 450 square feet on the second floor, for a total of 1,350 interior square feet. Although the total interior floorspace for the Custis's home plan met the new minimum requirement, their first-floor layout fell short by 150 square feet. The act of re-zoning the neighborhood blocked them from building an affordable home.^[The Custis family property was located at 563 Nott Street, Wethersfield, and the town's B-zone minimum-floorspace requirements were 550 square feet on the first floor and 300 square feet on the second floor, for a total of 850 interior square feet. @NegroWarHero1953]

Ione Custis petitioned the Wethersfield Zoning Board of Appeals in late 1952 to request permission to build their home as it was originally designed. Town officials heard her case and soon granted her request on a "hardship" basis, which allowed construction to begin. But a group of homeowners strongly objected and filed a lawsuit against town officials, claiming that they acted "illegally, arbitrarily in an abuse of their discretion" by granting Ione Custis permission to construct a home with less than the minimum floorspace required for A-1 zones. Were these White property owners acting against a home that was a bit too small---or the skin color of their new neighbors? Lemuel Custis reached out NAACP executive director Walter White, who offered assistance from the civil rights organization. After a six month delay, the judged ruled in favor of town officials, stating that they had reached a reasonable decision, which finally allowed the Custis family to build their home. Black newspapers around the nation also celebrated their victory. Lemuel thanked Walter White for the NAACP's support, and noted that he felt "some satisfaction in realizing that because of our experiences, perhaps another Negro family in Connecticut will not have to battle nearly two years to have their basic rights affirmed."^[Homeowners who filed a lawsuit against the Custis decision were led by Grace A. Pratt of 621 Nott Street, who resided one block from the construction site. @WethersfieldYouthGovernment1952; @WethersfieldZoneBoard1953; @WethersfieldAlcornGive1953; @WethersfieldGovernorSigns1953; @NegroWarHero1953; @custisLetterWalterWhite1953; @ConnecticutVetBuilding1953; @BarsVetBuilding1953]

The 1950s Custis case pushes us to think carefully about how to respond to the question: *Is zoning racist?*

- The *intent* of residential zoning in suburban Connecticut is *exclusionary* because minimum-floorspace requirements of upper-level zones require more expensive home construction and greater access to wealth than lower-level zones.
- The *impact* of exclusionary zoning disproportionately affects Black families, who on average have had less access to higher-earning jobs. Lemuel and Ione Custis were exceptions because they managed to overcome structural barriers and enter middle-class jobs in the 1950s....
- While exclusionary zoning can be a government-sponsored tool for housing discrimination, the Custis family was not the target of government-sponsored racism in this specific case. To the contrary, town officials granted their request to build a home that was slightly smaller than new zoning rules required, but met the spirit of the rule because they had sufficient wealth to build a home...
- Even if the group of White homeowners who objected to the Custis home were motivated by racism, town officials and the judicial system supported the middle-class Black couple rather than their middle-class White opponents.
- As middle-class Black homebuyers, the Custis family and their civil rights allies did *not* question whether Connecticut local governments had the right to enact exclusionary zoning according to wealth. To the contrary, they *accepted* the underlying premise of minimum-land and minimum-floorspace requirements in the suburbs, and only questioned whether the system treated them fairly by granting them the same individual property rights enjoyed by middle-class White homeowners. Neither the Custis family, nor the NAACP, nor the White-run town government, nor the White neighbors challenged the class-based barriers to homeownership...

#### EXTRAS for racism section

century after West Hartford and other Connecticut towns approved their first zoning ordinances, many question whether or not zoning is racist. This conflict arises in heated debates like this one in Woodbridge, where a coalition organized by the Open Communities Alliance submitted an application to construct multi-family housing, and have threatened legal action if the town does not approve it (and others)..

But fair-housing advocates make a distinction between the *intent* versus the *impact* of a law. While zoning rules were originally intended to avoid referring directly to people's race, religion, or nationality, the minimum-land requirements have a direct impact on the racial composition of the town, because White families tend to be wealthier...

When looking back at the *intent* of zoning in 1920s Connecticut suburban towns like West Hartford, there's strong evidence of *exclusionary* goals.... keeping out apartment buildings like those in the city, and the lower-income people who rent them....  zoning was a powerful legal tool to physically and socially distance neighborhoods by wealth, to separate the *haves* from the *have-nots*. In the context of 1920s suburban Connecticut, zoning also aligned with contemporary anti-Jewish and anti-immigrant views of dominant White Protestants....  But there was no explicit nor implicit language about using zoning to keep Black families out of suburban Hartford towns in the 1920s, because Black migration was still a distant White fear in the future, not the on-the-ground reality of their time.... The City of Hartford had less than X % Black residents in 1920, and most of them were segregated into tenements along the Connecticut River, far from the West Hartford border, where only X Black residents lived....
But zoning prevailed as an exclusionary tool not only because it did not mention color or creed, but because its *coded* targets of exclusion evolved over the decades.... and it became a powerful yet "color-blind" means of preventing lower-income Black, Puerto Rican, and White families from moving into the town in future decades....[transition to next chapter?]

TODO DECIDE if this is worth adding: Manville's interpretation: "R1 first proliferated after the Supreme Court struck down racial zoning in 1917’s Buchanan v. Warley decision. Buchanan made single-family mandates appealing because they maintained racial segregation without racial language. Forcing consumers to buy land in bulk made it harder for lower income people, and therefore most non-White people, to enter affluent places. R1 let prices discriminate when laws could not (Trounstine, 2018; Weiss, 1987). Contemporary observers denounced this regime of backdoor segregation, but in 1926 the Supreme Court upheld it. In Village of Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co. (1926), the court tacitly excused R1’s implicit racism by validating its explicit classism. Cities could prohibit apartments, the court said, because apartments were nuisances: “mere parasites” on the value and character of single-family homes. In Euclid’s wake, R1 became a quiet weapon of the White and wealthy in their campaign to live amid but not among the non-White and poor (Danielson, 1976; Rothstein, 2017; Trounstine, 2018)." ^[@manvilleViewpointItTime2019, p. 2]

West Hartford 1968
"Better Neighborhoods Through...
Enforcement of Housing Codes and Zoning Regulations"
"Good neighborhoods in the Town will remain through the continued upgrading by your Town goverment of the residential zoning of some 22,121 residential units and the enforcement of housing codes, which protect the appearance and value of residential property"
@westhartfordAnnualReportTown1968, no page numbers
