In "The Rise of Exclusionary Zoning in Connecticut," Jack Dougherty has a different point of view than the West Hartford residents who opposed Jacob Goldberg's efforts to build the Kingswood Market in 1923, but his article is as biased and uninformed as those century-old NIMBYs.

Dougherty explains that the court quickly allowed Goldberg to build Kingswood Market. The residents who opposed him either got over themselves or were small in number, because the market endured for seven decades. Goldberg shouldn't have faced ignorant and unfair opposition, but the author doesn't provide data supporting his thesis that West Hartford's zoning intentions were other than the quoted ones, to "bring 'orderliness and efficiency' to the town's rapid growth with 'an increase of health, comfort, and happiness for all people.'"

I moved from Frog Hollow, a "crowded tenement house" area in Hartford to a house in the "B" section of West Hartford in the 1980s. Dougherty's biases don't allow him to believe that people succeed and more resources mean more choices. He opposes zoning that results in similar-sized homes, which conflicts with the fact that the small Cape Cod houses in Elmwood form attractive, cohesive neighborhoods, just like the rows of "Perfect Sixes" in Frog Hollow. If we drive a few blocks north of Frog Hollow, to Asylum Hill, we see what a mix of commercial, single family and multi-family dwellings looks like. It's a mess.

The poor quality of housing in several Hartford neighborhoods has been an issue for more than a century. Dougherty is offended that West Hartford intended to "effectively prevent" such neighborhoods. Hartford razed impoverished neighborhoods, built housing projects, and then razed the projects. West Hartford avoided all that horrible disruption and expense with better planning and zoning.

Dougherty ignores environmental reasons for minimum lot size and maximum coverage and doesn't tell us how much of West Hartford was served by municipal water and sewers in 1924. As land coverage increases, ground water quality decreases. Much of West Hartford has clay soil with poor drainage. You need a large lot if you have a well and septic system, especially with poor drainage. The alternative to large lots is cholera.

According to the US Census Bureau's "Quick Facts" 2021 census data, Hartford and West Hartford have varied populations with very different racial profiles. "Hispanics" (45.5 percent) and "Blacks" (36.4 percent) comprise 81.9 percent of Hartford. Thirty percent of West Hartford is other than "White Alone, No Hispanic."

For the past century, West Hartford has served "all classes and all grades of economic activity." West Hartford remains a vibrant, growing town, because its leaders were and remain genuinely concerned about its residents and their future.

Peter Grant

Dear readers,

When authors publish interpretations of the past, we invite differences of opinion and dialogue about our work. The writer above criticizes my article, "The Rise of Exclusionary Zoning in Connecticut," on several grounds, but his central assertion seems to be: "[Dougherty] doesn't provide data supporting his thesis that West Hartford's zoning intentions were other than the quoted ones, to bring 'orderliness and efficiency' to the town's rapid growth with 'an increase of health, comfort, and happiness for all people.'" According to his perspective, zoning advocates of the 1920s simply desired an orderly and efficient community for everyone.

But careful readers of history understand why we need to dig below the surface of people's words and look more deeply at their actions within the context of their times. My article shows how the 1924 _West Hartord Zoning_ report expressly sorted residents into economically segregated, homogenous neighborhoods by inventing minimum-land rules to make it "uneconomic to build two-family houses" in A and B zones (nearly 85 percent of the town). Also, the report featured photos and captions to warn that "large apartment buildings are spreading farther west," designed to stir up suburban anxieties about "undesirable" urban residents, during a period of intense anti-immigrant sentiments. Peeking below the surface of zoning, we clearly see more at work here than a simplistic desire to create an orderly and efficient community for all.

Need more evidence? See more interpretation and sources in my _On The Line_ book-in-progress (OnTheLine.trincoll.edu) to understand how suburban leaders quickly embraced zoning during the twentieth century as a legally defensible strategy to exclude residents on the basis of wealth – without directly referring to race, religion, or nationality – to achieve goals similar to government-backed discriminatory barriers, such as redlining and restrictive covenants. Draw your own conclusions.

Jack Dougherty