write up Samuel Cullers CRC case and reversal by CT court

1956-04-01BH "Hartford's first full-scale discrimination-=in-housing case went to the State Civil Rights Commission this week..."

include two ad images from 1955 for McKinley Park apartments for rent, taken between time when he submitted his second application

TODO: show map location of McKinley Park Apartments on Dauntless Lane in Sanborn Hartford 1961 volume 4 page 414. Buildings have been torn down and street has been renamed Woodland Park, then removed today? Across street from St Francis Hospital and Urban League building.


From: "Cullers, Mark" <mcullers@FRESNO.COURTS.CA.GOV>
Subject: Samuel J. Cullers Housing Discrimination Case 1954-57
Date: March 11, 2021 at 4:21:17 PM EST
To: "'john.dougherty@trincoll.edu'" <john.dougherty@trincoll.edu>

Professor Dougherty:  I am the son of Samuel J. Cullers, whose case your Cities, Suburbs and Schools Project cited (“Samuel cullers Housing Discrimination Case  1954-57”, dated 12/11/13).  As the last surviving member of his immediate family, I was honored that you (and Ms. Heneghan) included his case.  I grew up hearing about the case and have the short article in Jet magazine that featured the case, with a picture of my mother and father.  I could not reach Ms. Heneghan, but wanted to thank her too.  If you need any more information about my father, please do not hesitate to contact me.

HON. MARK E. CULLERS
Superior Court of California, County of Fresno
1130 “O” Street
Department 404
Fresno, California  93724
(559) 457-6317
mcullers@fresno.courts.ca.gov
