## straw buyers NOTES


Comments from On The Line chat, Oct 3 2022
Daryl Harris
I just saw my life unfold before me ! I knew Spencer and his brother Dawson Shaw. What effect did housing have on The GI bill on blacks ?My dad had a white lawyer buy our home in Bloomfield. I went from Wish school in Hartford to Blue Hills school in Bloomfield in 1964.
The intergration of schools in Bloomfield is an area that should be discussed as well since Bloomfield won an all America award. My cousin jumped the line as he " lived " with us during the week.

From: darryl harris <dkharris06095@yahoo.com>
Subject: My history
Date: October 4, 2022 at 1:04:03 PM EDT
To: jack.dougherty@trincoll.edu
The presentation yesterday essentially is my life from first grade at Fred D Wish school on Barbour St in Hartford to Bloomfield high to  graduation from Trinity College. I have a story to tell. My connections to the names of people you mentioned left me with 5 degrees of separation. The role of the schools and churches would make an excellent addition to the narrative
Sent from my iPhone




From: Don Noel <dononoel@me.com>
Subject: Straw buyers
Date: October 5, 2022 at 4:00:03 PM EDT
To: John.Dougherty@trincoll.edu
Jack, no luck so far, but I just had a call from Penn Ritter, Who remembers going with his mother when she was casing houses. In some neighborhoods she became known as the lady who was the front for black families, and gussied up with a wig to make those visits. He also recalled that she never let a black family arrive without someone greet them, lining up a local minister a rabbi or a friend different neighbor so that they would find something other than cold shoulders on their first day.  If any of that interest you I can give you Penn’s number, although I told him that probably was too folksy for your interest. I still have a note out in the Quaker Meeting asking if there is anyone old enough to have helped, but I haven’t found anyone yet

From: 'Don Noel' via Hartford Monthly Meeting Google Group <HartfordMonthlyMeeting@googlegroups.com>
Date: Tue, Oct 4, 2022 at 2:20 PM
Subject: [HMM] Know any "straw buyers" to desegregate suburbs?
62 years ago, the Meeting’s Pat Ritter put together a program to help black families buy homes in the suburbs, which in those days was difficult-to-impossible.  Volunteers — mostly members of the Meeting — would shop for and buy a house-for-sale that a black family wanted; would turn the deed over to Pat’s organization; which would in turn the deed over to the black family.
Brad and I were involved (we bought our Blue Hills/Hartford home through Pat’s organization) but never played the straw-buyer role.
A friend and Trinity prof is writing a book about Greater Hartford segregation and desegregation in that era, and would love to interview someone who was one of Pat Ritter’s straw buyers.  I suspect most of them are gone by now, but if you know someone who remembers working in that effort six decades ago, won’t you urge them to call me please?
Thanks
Don Noel
(860)713-9960

On Thu, Oct 6, 2022, 9:51 PM martha ritter <ritter.martha@gmail.com> wrote:
Hi, Phil,
Interesting question…not sure I know of anyone still around.
But I think it is important that this not be thought of as “Pat’s organization.” Do you know who the Trinity prof is ? Presumably he is aware that both Pat and George Ritter founded Robert Littleton/CHIF.
Also, my mother studied for her real estate broker’s license so she would be the one to buy and sell the houses.
History can get a bit watered down in six decades! Do you think these details need to be conveyed?
Thanks.
Hope all is well.
Love to you and Karen.
Marty

On Oct 7, 2022, at 8:59 AM, Philip Will <phil@prodomus.com> wrote:
I'm forwarding this to Don. There might be more information in the Capital for Change archives. It is where CHIF was merged.
Phil Will
860 983 6070
phil@prodomus.com
227 Girard Ave
Hartford, CT 06105

From: martha ritter <ritter.martha@gmail.com>
Subject: Re: [HMM] Know any "straw buyers" to desegregate suburbs?
Date: October 7, 2022 at 9:52:48 AM EDT
To: phil will <phil@prodomus.com>
Cc: Don Noel <DonONoel@me.com>
Great. Thanks, Phil. Hi, Don!
I know quite a bit about the early days, but it seems that right now the goal is the straw buyers. I remember my mother buying up lots of houses with the $ my father raised. That’s how she became so identifiable and started wearing wigs, etc. Sometimes the actually buyers themselves would show up with my mother and pose as workmen helping checking out the house so they could see it.
XXX Marty
