Notes on Project Concern archives

- The original city-suburban student integration transfer program, Project Concern (1966-1998), was operated by the Hartford Public Schools, with funding provided by CT Dept of Ed. After 1998, CT shifted the program to be operated by CREC and changed its name to Project Choice, then to Open Choice as it is known today.

- In the early 2000s, Mary Carroll Kennedy, the long-term Project Concern administrator who made the transition from HPS to CREC, and her CREC employee Renita Satchell Ezell, approached me to find a home to donate two filing drawers of student info cards and reports & clippings about the program. Mary was concerned that they would be lost or destroyed if not safely kept somewhere. Attached is a scanned example of Renita's card when she was a student in the program in the 1970s-80s. The cards do contain personally identifiable information, but I am unsure of guidelines on what point in time it no longer becomes sensitive information.

- The student info cards (what they called "the computer") are historically significant because Project Concern was one of the first voluntary inter-district school integration programs in the US. Columbia University sociologist Robert Crain and his colleagues relied on these student index cards when researching the long-term outcomes of school integration. See one example of Crain's Hartford work in this 1992 report abstract, and his studies on Hartford and other locations were cited widely elsewhere, as described in Crain's 2016 obituary.
@crainFindingNichesDesegregated1992
@levineRobertCrainTC2016

- Trinity's Hartford Studies Program accepted these items as "The Mary Carroll Papers" but I am not aware of any formal deed of gift. Eventually the Hartford Studies Program materials were moved into the Watkinson Library at Trinity.  

- Years ago, my students and I created a spreadsheet with a 20 percent sample of student addresses and schools from the index cards, to better understand how the geography of participation in Project Concern changed from 1960s-90s.  And I'm still writing it up to include in my still-not-finished OnTheLine book.

- Oddly, a few months ago, one of the 1990s Sheff school integration lawyers showed up at my house and handed me a thick folder of Project Concern reports (mostly published studies by Crain, HPS), which once belonged in the Mary Carroll papers at Trinity's Hartford Studies Project, but had been sitting in his attic for a few decades(?). So I will bring those to the Watkinson soon!

- Mary recently died in Dec 2023. Renita retired from CREC but I still have her personal email (rgezell7@gmail.com) so let me know if you get to the stage where you would like me to introduce and update her about any relocation of the materials.
