ADD and expand Testing the Lines

2024 email response to student

Hi Larry,

Thanks for reaching out with your question about the availability of CT standardized test score data prior to 2000, and I'm cc:ing Prof. Douglas on my response to keep him in the loop.

This is a longer answer than you asked for, but I'm writing it up to include in a new chapter for my On The Line book because it's important to show how school performance data became more widely accessible over time, and shaped public expectations about education reform. Some key points:

1) CT first began to require schools to use the same standardized tests as part of the mid-1980s education accountability movement, but results were not widely viewed by the public until well into the 2000s, for reasons I explain in this article: Jack Dougherty et al., “School Choice in Suburbia: Test Scores, Race, and Housing Markets,” American Journal of Education 115, no. 4 (August 2009): 523–48, download.

2) During the 1990s and early 2000s, newspapers such as the Hartford Courant occasionally published full-page spreads of statewide results by district. But these typically appeared only once per year on paper, meaning that readers could not easily access them instantly during the rest of the year, unless someone saved the newsprint. Also, the newspaper published district-level results, not school-level results. Attached are two sample full-page PDFs of Connecticut Mastery Test (CMT) results by district, from Hartford Courant 29 Feb 1992 <https://www.newspapers.com/image/241697131/> and 2 Feb 2000 <https://www.newspapers.com/image/177782373/>. The links come from Newspapers(dot)com, and I believe you can sign up for a 7-day free account to view them, and search for others using similar keywords.

While I normally recommend students use the Trinity Library database for the Hartford Courant, for the 1992-present period that database only shows text of the story, not a full-page view with data graphics. For example, here's the Library's Hartford Courant Proquest entry for the 2 Feb 2000 story above, which includes this note at the end:
"[Library note: The actual numbers were not available for this database.]" <https://www.proquest.com/hartfordcourant/docview/256457695/39367032EDE44F84PQ/1?accountid=46995&sourcetype=Newspapers>
So that's why I'm pointing you to a free trial of Newspapers(dot)com.

3) The Internet was still relatively new in the late 1990s-early 2000s, and different entities gradually made CT test scores available online, but not as quickly as you might think today. The wonderful Wayback Machine by the Internet Archive shows us what several websites looked like at different points in time, and many links still work, but probably not the crucial links inside databases that you want. Some examples: -- see links in Zotero ch4 testing rating schools
- in 2002-03, here is the CT Dept of Education home page > link to its CMT Reports page > but most links to CMT databases no longer function
- during the 1990s-2000s, the CT Dept of Ed regularly published Strategic School Profiles that contained school test scores, but these links point to PDFs that mostly appear not to have been archived by the Wayback Machine. While they should have been archived on paper by the CT Dept of Ed or CT State Library, let's hold off on that for now.
- in 2009 the Hartford Courant print newspaper began pointing readers to its short link to school test score data, but that link no longer works and is not archived on the Wayback Machine

4) But here's some good news!
in 2002-03, the lower section of this archived CT Dept of Education Students & Testing page contains 1993+ links to CMT school-level results, which point to data stored in HTML pages that still work, because they are not inside databases. See screenshot of where to click, plus this example of 1993 school-level data.

5) Now for some very important cautions against comparing CT standardized test score data between districts or over time. While it's tempting to simply compare the percentage of students in district A vs. B who performed at goal in a subject area (such as math) over two time periods (such as 1994 and 2004), the CT Dept of Ed and its measurement experts strongly warned against doing so, for different reasons. For example, see this archived 2003 CT Dept of Ed PDF, pp. 2-3 about cautions when making comparisons.  While the first part warns against making district-to-district comparisons due to test participation rates etc., the second part mentions different generations of the CMT standardized test (in 2002, CMT-3 or generation 3), which is not directly comparable to earlier CMT generations because it did not include identical math content.

More importantly, the 2003 PDF explains how the No Child Left Behind Act required CT to change its scoring system and timing of tests to match the new federal standard. (There was a huge legal fight over this and CT lost.) My recollection is that one of the biggest changes was that CT previously tested elementary grade students in October, but had to shift to testing them March, which means that a "4th" grade result now compares very different groups of students over time. In other words, most experts agree that simply comparing pre- vs post-NCLB CT test scores is not a reliable indicator of meaningful educational change.

Sorry if this is longer or more complex than what you asked for, but your question helped me to spell out something that I need to write up anyways. If you find new material I'm not aware of, or interpretations that differ from mine, please share!
