Some of the best research on how Hartford-area magnet schools actually operate and select students has been conducted by journalists. So the good news is that journalists are investigating and reporting on a topic that few ed researchers are currently addressing. The bad news is that journalism sometimes favors specific attention-grabbing controversies over larger structural and political forces. For example, see selected stories below, which tend to paint the Sheff case as the “bad guys”  while ignoring that CT leaders (both Republicans and Democrats) have effectively stopped advancing on meeting constitutional requirements from the 1996 decision.

Jacqueline Rabe Thomas (also Trinity MA in PBPL) has consistently done the best reporting on magnet school choice processes, and the slow pace of CT leaders meeting constitutional requirements under Gov Malloy’s administration (which has not improved under Lamont).

Jacqueline Rabe Thomas, “New Data: Majority of Hartford Schools Still Segregated; Some Progress Made,” CT Mirror, December 1, 2016, http://ctmirror.org/2016/12/01/new-data-majority-of-hartford-schools-still-segregated-some-progress-made/.

Jacqueline Rabe Thomas, “School Choice: Betting the Odds,” The CT Mirror, December 21, 2016, https://ctmirror.org/2016/12/21/school-choice-betting-the-odds/.

Jacqueline Rabe Thomas, “State to Run School Desegregation Lottery but Tight-Lipped on Seat Count,” The CT Mirror, April 13, 2017, https://ctmirror.org/2017/04/13/state-to-run-school-desegregation-lottery-but-seat-count-unclear/.


This American Life podcast examined how magnet schools recruit white suburban families (which I’ve assigned to my students to listen, or if you prefer to read, see “transcript” button at the top.)

Chana Joffe-Walt, “The Problem We All Live With - Part Two,” This American Life, August 7, 2015, https://www.thisamericanlife.org/563/the-problem-we-all-live-with-part-two.

Vanessa De La Torre and Matthew Kauffman wrote this award-winning series of Hartford Courant stories in 2017, which revealed how specific magnets did not follow official lottery guidelines:

Vanessa De La Torre, Matthew Kauffman, and Kathleen Megan, “Story Gallery: Hartford Schools: More Separate, Still Unequal,” Hartford Courant, March 12, 2017, http://www.courant.com/education/hc-hartford-schools-more-separate-still-unequal-20170310-storygallery.html.

Note that some Courant stories advance a controversial view that magnets result in "racial quotas," which Kathleen Megan (now at CT Mirror) continues to raise in stories on the Robinson v Wentzell case by the Pacific Legal Foundation.

Megan, Kathleen, “Federal Judge to Hear Arguments Thursday in School Racial Quota Case,” CT Mirror, December 4, 2019, https://ctmirror.org/2019/12/04/federal-judge-to-hear-arguments-thursday-in-school-racial-quota-case/.

See this brief opinion piece by Sheff advocates against the Robinson plaintiffs:

Rachel Martin and Cara McCellan, “Connecticut’s Effort to Integrate Hartford Schools Is Working,” Text, The Hill, July 17, 2018, http://thehill.com/opinion/education/397201-connecticuts-effort-to-integrate-hartford-schools-is-working.

Diane Zannoni and our students and I analyzed school choice applications, but we stopped in 2015 when CT Dept of Ed officials made it impossible for us to do research on this data. Here was our last report:

Jack Dougherty et al., “Who Chooses in the Hartford Region? Report 2: A Statistical Analysis of Regional School Choice Office Applicants and Non-Applicants among Hartford and Suburban-Resident Students in the Spring 2013 Lottery” (Hartford, CT: Cities Suburbs Schools Project at Trinity College, October 17, 2015), http://digitalrepository.trincoll.edu/cssp_papers/48/.

Also, here’s two older pieces I wrote with Diane and/or students that analyzed magnet school implementation issues:

Jack Dougherty et al., “School Information, Parental Decisions, and the Digital Divide: The SmartChoices Project in Hartford, Connecticut,” in Educational Delusions? Why Choice Can Deepen Inequality and How to Make Schools Fair, ed. Gary Orfield and Erica Frankenberg (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2013), 219–37, https://books.google.com/books?id=x9AlDQAAQBAJ&lpg=PR1&pg=PA219#v=onepage&q&f=false.   (If you want a PDF, just ask.)

Jack Dougherty, Jesse Wanzer, and Christina Ramsay, “Sheff v. O’Neill: Weak Desegregation Remedies and Strong Disincentives in Connecticut, 1996-2008,” in From the Courtroom to the Classroom: The Shifting Landscape of School Desegregation, ed. Claire Smrekar and Ellen Goldring (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press, 2009), 103–27, http://digitalrepository.trincoll.edu/cssp_papers/3/.


Clarify terms of Sheff 2020 agreement

I’m currently revising a paper that I prepared for AERA, hoping to submit it to a journal soon (I’m targeting Race, Ethnicity, and Education). I’m reaching out to see if you could help me fact-check my understanding of the 2020 Sheff settlement. Below in blue what I have in the paper, based on my best understanding. Basically, I’m not sure if the new SES targets replace, or are in addition to, the previous racial/ethnic targets. Please feel free to correct me if needed, suggest more accurate wording, etc. Thanks so much for your help!
Best,
Elise

Between 2013 and 2020, the share of Hartford students attending desegregated schools remained flat at around 40 percent, prompting the Sheff plaintiffs to pursue additional litigation. These efforts resulted in the latest settlement, established in January 2020, which created over 1,000 new magnet school seats and allocated 600 of these seats to Hartford students (Rabe Thomas, 2020). In addition, the 2020 settlement maintained a commitment to achieving desegregation through the previous settlements’ racial and ethnic targets, yet also established the goal of enrolling no more than 60 percent low-income students (Johnson, 2020; Sheff v. O’Neill Stipulation and Proposed Order, 2020).
