People often ask, "Did Sheff succeed or fail?", but that informal language misses the broader point about who is accountable. Remember that Elizabeth Horton Sheff and her coalition of Black, Latino, and White parents from city and suburban communities filed a complaint against Connecticut leaders in 1989, charging that state policies denied their children an equal educational opportunity. Connecticut's Supreme Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in 1996, by finding that the racial and economic isolation of Hartford's schools violated the state's constitutional obligation to provide all children with a quality integrated education, and ordered state leaders to provide a remedy.

So let's reframe the question: "Have Connecticut's elected leaders succeeded or failed in implementing a remedy to meet our constitutional obligation to provide children with a quality integrated education?" Asking it this way places accountability where it belongs on -- on our elected leaders -- and also brings it back to all of us who are eligible to vote, because we elected them into these positions of power. According to the most recent data compiled by the CT Mirror, Connecticut created desegregated schools for only 41 percent of Hartford Black and Latino students as of 2019-20, a figure that stalled and slipped downward during Governor Malloy's administration. Over 2,000 Hartford students who applied for a seat in a desegregated school for that year did not receive one, adding to a backlog of disappointment from prior years.

Looking ahead, progress by Connecticut's currently elected leadership remains to be seen. In January 2020, Governor Lamont's administration and the Sheff plaintiffs reached a new settlement, approved by the Connecticut court, to expand the number of Hartford students in desegregated schools. The agreement also promises a new student lottery that ensures magnet schools are socioeconomically diverse, and more data transparency to help address any inequalities that exist. To be clear, we should not rely solely on a reform strategy that requires individual families to apply for seats in more equal schools, because the system itself requires more institutional changes to meet our constitutional standards for educational equality. But Connecticut's leaders have insisted on a voluntary approach to integration, and the Greater Hartford Regional School Choice Office application process is currently underway (through January 31st). I look forward to seeing the results.

## Responses to magnet school questions from Action Lab team, November 2021

1. Can you speak to what kinds of improvements have been made to the magnet schools over the years?

First, let's clarify that nearly all of today's 40+ interdistrict magnet schools were created as a direct result of the Sheff v O'Neill school integration lawsuit. In 1989, Elizabeth Horton Sheff and her coalition of Black, Latino, and White parents from city and suburban communities filed a complaint against Connecticut leaders, charging that state policies denied their children an equal educational opportunity. In 1996, the Connecticut Supreme Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, found that the racial and economic isolation of Hartford's schools violated the state's constitutional obligation to provide all children with a quality integrated education, and ordered state leaders to provide a remedy.

Prior to the Sheff lawsuit, the only Hartford-area magnet school was the Greater Hartford Academy of the Arts, established in 1989, which had few resources and was located around that time in an old funeral home on Wethersfield Avenue in Hartford. Despite the Sheff legal victory in court, Connecticut's governor and legislative leaders (Republicans and Democrats) largely defended White suburban interests by delaying any meaningful school integration remedy for several years. After the Sheff plaintiffs took state leaders back to court in the early 2000s to fulfill their constitutional obligation for equal educational opportunity, Connecticut legislators agreed to fund a *voluntary* public school choice integration plan that relied primarily on interdistrict magnet schools, designed to "attract" both suburban and city students to cross over school district lines to attend specialized curricular programs, with extra funding by the state. Unlike a mandatory plan that would have changed school boundary lines and required everyone to integrate, this voluntary plan meant that no families (in particular, no White suburban families) were required to change schools, and as a result it placed the burden of integration primarily on Black and Latino families in Hartford. For more details about this period, see:

Jack Dougherty, Jesse Wanzer, and Christina Ramsay, “Missing the Goal: A Visual Guide to Sheff v. O’Neill School Desegregation: June 2007” (Hartford, Connecticut and Storrs, Connecticut: The Cities, Suburbs and Schools research project at Trinity College and the University of Connecticut Center for Education Policy Analysis, 2007), http://digitalrepository.trincoll.edu/cssp_papers/6/.

Jack Dougherty, Jesse Wanzer, and Christina Ramsay, “Sheff v. O’Neill: Weak Desegregation Remedies and Strong Disincentives in Connecticut, 1996-2008,” in From the Courtroom to the Classroom: The Shifting Landscape of School Desegregation, ed. Claire Smrekar and Ellen Goldring (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press, 2009), 103–27, http://digitalrepository.trincoll.edu/cssp_papers/3/.

Today there are about 40+ interdistrict magnet schools across the metro Hartford region, located both in the city and suburbs. Most magnets are operated by either the Hartford Public Schools district or the Capitol Region Education Council (CREC), a few are operated by universities or suburban school districts, and the application and placement process is overseen by the Greater Hartford Regional School Choice Office, a state entity. However, not all state-funded magnet schools actually meet court-approved requirements to count as racially integrated schools. See 2017-18 map and links below:



Map from Jacqueline Rabe Thomas and Jake Kara, “School Choice Lottery a Mystery for Parents as Desegregation Efforts Stall,” The CT Mirror, February 27, 2018, https://ctmirror.org/category/ct-viewpoints/school-choice-lottery-mystery-parents-desegregation-efforts-wane/.

See current list of all magnet schools in the RSCO Family Guide, https://choiceeducation.org


2. What impacts have these changes had?

Although Connecticut funded the creation of many magnet schools in the 2000s, state leaders (both Democrats and Republicans) stalled the school integration movement in the mid-2010s. According to the most recent data compiled by the CT Mirror, Connecticut created desegregated schools for only 41 percent of Hartford Black and Latino students as of 2019-20, which actually fell backward from its peak a few years earlier. Over 2,000 Hartford students who applied for a seat in a desegregated school for that year did not receive one, adding to a backlog of disappointment from prior years. As a result, Connecticut has created a two-tier system of schooling for Hartford's Black and Latino students: about 40 percent attend an integrated school (mostly the better-resourced magnet schools) and about 60 percent attend a racially and economically segregated neighborhood school (usually with fewer resources than magnet schools). See chart (which I adapted from the news story below) and also see the brand-new video documentary below:


Jacqueline Rabe Thomas, “State Settles School Desegregation Case,” The CT Mirror, January 10, 2020, https://ctmirror.org/2020/01/10/state-settles-school-desegregation-case/.

Connecticut Public, “Sheff v. O’Neill: Striving Toward Education Equity [Video]” (CT Public Cutline Series, November 2021), https://cptv.org/programs/cutline-special-sheff-v-oneill-striving-toward-education-equity/.

3. What improvements can you recommend?

Since Connecticut is obligated to fulfill its constitutional obligation to provide Hartford students with a quality integrated education, and since state leaders have pushed for a *voluntary* plan that does not force individual White suburban families to change schools, then they need to create more magnet schools (and similar integrated education programs such as Open Choice) to meet this obligation. In January 2020, Governor Lamont's administration and the Sheff plaintiffs reached a new settlement, approved by the Connecticut court, which is designed to improve progress toward fulfilling the state's constitutional obligation to provide a quality integrated education to all Hartford students. The settlement calls for creating over 1,000 new seats in magnet schools, increasing funding to create new magnets in the future, and better long-term planning for quality integrated education. See details in Rabe Thomas's 2020 article above.

4. Have magnet schools affected public schools? In what ways?

First, avoid making a common mistake. Both magnet schools and neighborhood schools are "public schools" because they receive public funding and follow public laws about how they operate.

But as I described above, Connecticut leaders created a two-tier public school system when they established some magnet schools with specialized themes and extra resources to attract suburban and city families, but did not create enough magnets for all Hartford students who wish to attend them.

5. How accessible are these schools? Transportation/ learning disabilities?

Connecticut provides free school bus transportation to all students in the Hartford region who are enrolled in magnet schools (if they live more than 0.5 to 1.5 miles away, depending on the age of the student, I think). Some Hartford students have long bus rides to magnet schools located in distant suburbs, and some suburban students have long bus rides to magnet schools located in the city. But transportation to magnet schools is funded, so it's not usually perceived as a barrier by families who voluntarily apply to attend these schools through the RSCO application and lottery placement process.

Connecticut law also requires that students with special needs are provided appropriate services in all public schools, magnet or otherwise. But many magnet schools have curricular themes (such as STEM, Classical, or college names like HMTCA, etc.) that do not send welcoming messages to families of children with special needs, so they do not apply at the same rate as one would expect. Robert Cotto's 2014 report found that students with special needs and students who do not speak English as a first language are under-represented in many magnet schools.

Robert Cotto, Jr. and Kenneth Feder, Choice Watch: Diversity and Access in Connecticut’s School Choice Programs (CT Voices for Children, 2014), http://www.ctvoices.org/publications/choice-watch-diversity-and-access-connecticuts-school-choice-programs.

6. To what extent do you feel that they are helping the issue of segregation in public schools?

I criticize Connecticut leaders for creating a voluntary remedy based on magnet schools to address broader systemic problems of racism and economic privilege in public education. But it's important to remember that Elizabeth Horton Sheff and her coalition have been pushing state leaders for over three decades to provide a quality integrated education to Hartford students. So far, Connecticut leaders have provided about 40 magnet schools -- which clearly is not enough to satisfy the demand of 2000+ Hartford students who applied last year and were turned away -- and probably more who didn't even bother to apply because they knew the odds were against them, or because magnet schools did not send welcoming messages to students with special needs and/or students whose first language is not English. But if the Sheff coalition had not brought its lawsuit against the state in 1989, most of those magnet schools would probably *not* exist today, and Hartford students would have fewer opportunities for quality integrated education.
