Leslie

Here's my quick interpretation of the past and present landscape of school integration activism in Connecticut, and of course, other folks may see it differently.

Although I did not arrive In Hartford until 1999, there was extensive community-based activism for school integration, as well as legal and political activity, during my first decade here. The multiracial Sheff coalition of city and suburban plaintiffs, led by their attorneys, originally came together to file their initial lawsuit in 1989. They worked hard to rally political pressure on local and state officials as dozens of witnesses testified in state court in the early-to-mid 1990s. When the CT Supreme Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs and declared Hartford's segregated schools to be unconstitutional in 1996 -- but did not specify a remedy -- many different stakeholders pushed for their vision of what integrated education should look like. Both the Republican Governor John Rowland and the Democratic Attorney General Dick Blumenthal -- backed by the predominantly White suburban legislature of Rs and Ds -- fought to maintain the boundary lines between city and suburban towns & school districts, even though the court officially declared those lines to be unconstitutional. Instead, CT state leaders pushed for a vision of "voluntary" school integration, which meant that individual families (city and suburban) could decide if they wished to participate, and suburban school districts could decide if or how many urban students they wished to enroll. While the Sheff plaintiffs "won" in court in 1996, and everyone began to see the early growth of voluntary magnet schools and expansion of city-to-suburb voluntary choice programs, CT leaders did not sign a deal with the Sheff plaintiffs -- and commit significant funding in the state legislature -- until 2003. The Sheff plaintiffs and their attorneys agreed to embrace a "voluntary" integration plan that grew magnets and choice programs, while maintaining the existing boundary lines. (Read more in this 2009 book chapter.)

From 2003 to the present, the Sheff plaintiffs and their attorneys have continued to challenge CT officials in court -- but also began to cooperate -- to build this new voluntary system of magnet schools and expanded inter-district choice. Lots of legal and political pressure was required to persuade suburban-rural legislators to fund many brand-new magnet schools, transportation networks, and curricular incentives for White suburban families to voluntarily participate. But as time goes by, the activist movement of the 1980s-90s-2000s has gradually been replaced, perhaps necessarily, by a maintenance movement to preserve magnet and choice funding in the state legislature, especially as education costs rise and student demographies shift. The Sheff Movement Coalition still holds monthly meetings online to share information and keep up with changes (see screenshot of their most Jan 2025 agenda), but perhaps their most important activity now is to lobby the state legislature to fully fund magnet schools in complex multi-party debates over the state's evolving Education Cost Sharing (ECS) formula (see explainer by School + State Finance Project).
