## How We Found Restrictive Covenants {- #covenants}
*by [Katie Campbell Levasseur, David K. Ware, June Gold, and Jack Dougherty](authors.html)*

Our **[Restricting with Property Covenants](restricting.html) chapter in this book** was inspired by several public history and advocacy projects across the U.S, including several now organized as the [National Covenants Research Coalition](https://www.nationalcovenantsresearchcoalition.com). One of the earliest to launch online was the [Segregated Seattle project](https://depts.washington.edu/civilr/segregated.htm) in 2005, where researchers found White-only and anti-Jewish covenants in tens of thousands of properties across King County and Washington State. Their public history work pushed state legislators to approve a 2006 law to encourage homeowners to strike out racist covenants in the public record, and a 2023 law to provide compensation for victims.^[@NationalCovenantsResearch2022. The earliest digital history project on racial property deeds probably was @plotkinRacialReligiousRestrictive2015, which states that content was posted online prior to 1999. On Seattle and Washington State, see @gregorySegregatedSeattle2006 and @civilrightsandlaborhistoryconsortiumuniversityofwashingtonRacialRestrictiveCovenants2023.]

This chapter outlines different strategies for finding race restrictive covenants in Connecticut. Our methods vary by the type of land records available in each town clerk's office, and our methods also changed over time as more (but not all) documents from the past have gradually been digitized. When possible, we recommend consulting with local experts who have more experience, such as property lawyers and professional title searchers, and to learn from methods advanced by members of the [National Covenants Research Coalition](https://www.nationalcovenantsresearchcoalition.com). We share our experiences to encourage readers to search their own local property records, build public awareness of how racism shaped our communities, and to advocate for policies that promote justice in housing.

### From Oral Interviews to Printed Records {-}
One method to finding racial covenants is to start with oral interviews and trace leads back through printed property records. When Katie Campbell and Jack Dougherty began searching in West Hartford in 2010, we began with anecdotal accounts by long-term residents that we attempted to confirm in the Town Clerk's property records. But we faced several obstacles. First, the town clerk's land records room contained over 4,000 print volumes of land transaction documents, with partially-organized paper indexes but few digitized records at that time. Second, we had no legal training nor experience with title searching, so we read accounts of what other researchers had done elsewhere and tried to apply it to our local context. Third, no one in our small circle of Hartford-area civil rights activists, attorneys, or town officials had ever seen a restrictive covenant in the Hartford region, so we didn't know exactly what to look for or whether we would actually find one. Due to the overwhelming size of the task at that time, we limited our search to property records in West Hartford, the largest suburb bordering the City of Hartford, and did not attempt to look elsewhere.

Tracey Wilson, the West Hartford town historian and history teacher, gave us leads for possible covenants from anecdotal accounts by long-term residents while writing her monthly history column in the *West Hartford Life* periodical. Our most specific lead came from Mary Everett, who described in our history interview how she bought a home at 30 Ledgewood Road around 1970, when her lawyer mentioned that the property included a racially restrictive covenant from the 1940s that was no longer enforceable.^[@everettOralHistoryInterview2011]

Working backwards with property records, we traced the real estate transaction from the 1970s to the original deed in the 1940s. When conducting our research in 2010, the Town of West Hartford had recently made available a public online property assessment database, which allowed searches by name or address, but with transactions only into the 1970s. Our search for Mary Everett (or her spouse, Ronald) pointed us to a 1970 warranty deed in book 474, page 185, available only in print volumes in the property records room. This 1970 deed referred to the printed book and page numbers for prior transactions. By tracing the trail backwards in time, we finally found the original 1940 deed for the High Ledge Homes subdivision, which included this race restriction: "No persons of any race except the white race shall use or occupy any building on any lot except that this covenant shall not prevent occupancy by domestic servants of a different race employed by an owner or tenant." Also, the entire High Ledge Homes subdivision appeared on a wall map in the property room, which referenced a 1938 subdivision surveyor's map number 222, stored separately on microfilm in the town clerk's office. By matching up past and present maps, we geographically confirmed that 30 Ledgewood Road was constructed on building lot #78, one of the 84 parcels of land specifically restricted by the racial covenant in the original 1940 subdivision deed, described in the video in Figure \@ref(fig:2011-covenants-video).^[@campbellHowWeFound2011; @highledgehomesinc.AgreementConcerningBuilding1940]

(ref:2011-covenants-video) In this [2011 video](https://player.vimeo.com/video/220562166), Katie Campbell Levasseur describes how we traced restrictive covenants in paper property records in the Town of West Hartford town clerk's office.

```{r 2011-covenants-video, fig.cap="(ref:2011-covenants-video)"}
if(knitr::is_html_output(excludes="markdown")) knitr::include_url("https://player.vimeo.com/video/220562166") else knitr::include_graphics("images/2011-covenants-video.png")
```

We also tried to widen our search by skimming paper indexes of real estate transactions in the Town of West Hartford's property records room. For example, a print volume called the *Grantor Index Corporate Pages* listed transactions by grantor (seller) to grantee (buyer) in partially alphabetical order by years during the racial covenant period (roughly 1920s through 1940s). We searched for listings labeled as "agreements" and inspected those by volume and page to see the deed between parties included any restrictions. Using this approach, we identified about 200 deeds listed as agreements, and among those we found 22 agreements that included some type of restriction, all between 1933 and 1949. (We determined that before 1933, searching for "agreements" was not a productive way to look for restrictions, because we found restrictions in deeds that were not listed as having "agreements".) As a result, we found two types of restrictions on property deeds between 1915 and 1950, which we labeled *value* and *race*. Value restrictions were more common than race restrictions. Value restrictions typically stated that the owner could not build a home below a certain square footage, or below a minimum price (such as $5,000 in the 1920s), in an effort to maintain higher property values. But race restrictions stated that the land could not be occupied by non-White people, except for domestic servants. In some cases, deeds combined the two types. In either case, individuals or developers used these restrictions to control the social class and/or racial composition of a neighborhood, and its relative price in the minds of prospective wealthy White buyers.

Looking back, over the past decade the partial digitization of West Hartford records makes the job somewhat easier today, but still requires searching print volumes to reliably trace sales back into the 1940s. First, the [Town of West Hartford Online Assessment Database](https://gis.vgsi.com/westhartfordct/Default.aspx) offers name and address search, but ownership history is currently incomplete prior to the 1970s. Second, the [Town of West Hartford Land Records portal](https://www.westhartfordct.gov/town-departments/townl-clerk/land-records) offers search by name, date, and book-page number (not consistently by address or parcel number), but many document images are still not available online, and lands records are incomplete prior to 1963. Searching by paper is still necessary for land records in this town at this point in time.

In sum, while our 2010 study of West Hartford was not exhaustive, we located race restrictive covenants in 5 subdivisions that included about 190 parcels of land in the early 1940s. We estimate about 6 percent of West Hartford homes built during this period had restrictive covenants, given around 3,020 buildings were constructed in town during the 1940s. We count the entire decade because developers did not successfully sell homes on every parcel during the Depression and World War. In 2012 we placed scanned PDFs of all historical documents and digitized subdivision boundaries in an interactive Google Map, hosted by the University of Connecticut Libraries Map and Geographic Information Center. In 2017, we migrated historical documents and geodata into our [GitHub public repository](https://github.com/ontheline/otl-covenants/) and displayed them in our [open-source Leaflet map](https://ontheline.github.io/otl-covenants/index-caption.html).^[See table calculations, historical documents, and map code in @ilyankouMapRaceRestrictive2017]

**WAIT ON THESE PARAGRAPHS**

Starting with anecdotal accounts of restrictive covenants produced mixed results, which perhaps tells us something about *historical memory* and how people believe they remember the past. Both during and a decade after our research, we heard some White West Hartford residents describe their memories of anti-Jewish or anti-Catholic restrictive covenants on their homes, yet still have not found documents supporting claims about their specific properties, nor any religious-based covenants in West Hartford as of this writing. For example, in two 2021 publications about the history of segregation in West Hartford, Mayor Shari Cantor recalled that her home on Colony Road "actually had a restrictive covenant and did not allow Jewish people." But when tracing back the paper records, we found no documentation of any restrictive covenant on her property. Yet other residents agree that Jewish homebuyers were excluded from that neighborhood, as surnames listed in late 1950s city directories appear to confirm.^[Shari Cantor recalled anti-Jewish restrictive covenants on her home at 39 Colony Road, West Hartford, in a video oral history for @napervilleheritagesocietyWestHartfordConnecticut2022, and a journalist interview in @puttermanWestHartfordMostly2021. See discussion of Jewish exclusion and 1958 city directory evidence in @wilsonHowSegregationHappened2019. For more anecdotal accounts of anti-Jewish and anti-Catholic covenants that we could not confirm with documents, see @wilsonTakingStockHigh2010. Wilson wrote: "By word of mouth I had heard that in the 1930s and 1940s and into the 1950s, no Roman Catholics could live on Stoner Drive, the first street developed on 'the mountain.' No Catholics could buy on Wood Pond or Sunset Farms. According to another resident, the address of a house on the corner of Foxcroft Road and Fern Street was changed to Fern Street because no Jews were allowed on Foxcroft Road." But we could not find property records to confirm any of those 2010 claims.]

How do we explain this difference between historical memory versus documents? One interpretation is that homeowners might be confusing different causes of housing segregation. Rather than a restrictive covenant (which would appear in a property deed), perhaps Jewish homebuyers were excluded by a neighborhood association agreement (which might exist on paper, but not filed as a property record with the town government), or more likely the real estate agents who refused to show property to outsiders (which may have been openly discussed, but not documented on paper). A second interpretation is that White homeowners might wish to identify with opponents of segregation rather than its proponents. When Mayor Shari Cantor described her personal experience with housing discrimination to a journalist in 2021, she did so in the context of defending her gradualist approach to affordable housing policy in the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement. As the journalist wrote: "Shari Cantor, West Hartford’s mayor, says she understands her town’s history of discriminatory housing practices, noting that the house she lives in once held a restrictive covenant. Today, she says, she hopes to create a more inclusive town--- but is wary of any housing policy that might risk residents' property values."^[@puttermanWestHartfordMostly2021]

**WAIT ABOVE**

### Full-Text Historical Newspaper Searches {-}
Another strategy to locate racial covenants is to search for keywords in full-text historical newspaper databases, which may lead to news stories or real estate ads with clues to trace back in the property records. For example, in our 2010 research for racial covenants in West Hartford, we searched the full-text *Hartford Courant* historical newspaper, at that time a newer 2005-era technology available through our Trinity College library subscription to the ProQuest database, and now more widely available through the [ResearchIT CT portal](https://researchitct.org) with any Connecticut public library card. By searching for "restrictive" and "covenant" and related terms, we found 1947 news accounts about Simon Bernstein, a Hartford lawyer and Democratic city council member, who wrote a public letter asking the state legislative Judiciary Committee to invalidate race- and religious-restrictive covenants. The *Hartford Courant* White daily newspaper ran a short excerpt of Bernstein's letter, which mentioned an unnamed nearby town where a property deed restricted its sale "to only non-semitic members of the Caucasian race." Later our search of Library of Congress historical newspapers led us to the *Hartford Chronicle*, a Black weekly newspaper, which published Bernstein's full letter. Six decades after Bernstein wrote his letter, we were very fortunate to conduct an oral history interview with him at age 98. He clearly recalled a different racial covenant case he was involved in as an attorney, regarding the Mountain Road area of West Hartford, which was settled out of court. But without sufficient details, we never found any documentation about either covenant seen by Bernstein.^[Compare the excerpt versus the full letter in @BernsteinSeeksEnd1947; @bernsteinLetterEditor1947, and see also @bernsteinOralHistoryInterview2011. *Hartford Courant* historical newspaper searches are now publicly available through @connecticutstatelibraryResearchITCT. Learn more about @HartfordChronicle1940 and related newspapers, publicly available through @uslibraryofcongressChroniclingAmericaHistoric]

More recently, we have had more success searching for clues about restrictive covenants in newspaper real estate ads from the early 20th century across Connecticut. Purchasing an individual subscription on the [Newspapers.com](https://www.newspapers.com/) platform allowed us to do full-text searching of multiple newspapers across the entire state, though many papers still have not yet been digitized. For example, by searching for key phrases --- such as "wisely restricted" or "reasonable..." or "sensible..." or "proper restrictions" --- we found several Connecticut real estate advertisements that openly publicized euphemistic prohibitions, as shown in Figure \@ref(fig:2024-newspapers-search). These code words sometimes led us directly to anti-Black and anti-Jewish prohibitions in the town land records. Another advantage of searching the Newspapers.com database is its wider inclusion of *Hartford Courant* local and regional editions for suburban and rural towns, compared to the ProQuest database that sometimes includes only the city edition.^[@ancestry.comNewspapersCom]

(ref:2024-newspapers-search) Screenshot of search for "wisely restricted" coded phrase in Newspapers.com database.

```{r 2024-newspapers-search, fig.cap="(ref:2024-newspapers-search)"}
 knitr::include_graphics("images/2024-newspapers-search.png")
```

### Search for Suburban Subdivision Maps {-}
Another strategy to locate restrictive covenants in Connecticut focuses on how housing developers converted rural farmland into suburban subdivisions, and the maps they created in that process. When David Ware searched for racial covenants in suburban Manchester, he went to the Town Clerk's office and began looking at surveyor's maps of suburban subdivisions, submitted by developers for town approval from the 1910s through the 1950s. Depending on the town, original paper subdivision maps may be stored in large flat drawers, or they may have been microfilmed or digitized into an online database. Typically, these maps identify the seller of the property, the person or corporation subdividing it into smaller plots for home sales, a name for the real estate development, and the year, as shown in


...as shown in Figure \@ref(fig:sample-image).

(ref:sample-image) Caption 

```{r sample-image, fig.cap="(ref:sample-image)"}
 knitr::include_graphics("images/bookdown/sample-image.png")
```



- For a “quick” sampling, I jot down the owner/developer names for the larger subdivisions – you know , those that are creating new neighborhoods of 30, 40, 50, 60 or more residential lots.  Those kind of developments are definitely ones where the developers want to create a “standard” form of deed for the sale of the lots to builders or homeowners, in order to keep things uniform among all of the buyers of the lots.  This is not to say that smaller subdivisions never contain the race-based covenants, but, again, for efficiency, I start with the bigger subdivisions.
- The developer or owner of the approved subdivision that you have just found (and made notes about) will become the first seller, or “Grantor” of all of the lots in that subdivision.  So, now consult the “Grantor Index” for the time period following the approval of the subdivision.  Example, if the subdivision was approved in 1940, I look at the grantor index for 1940 to 1950, and I look for the name of the developer or owner.
- Often, we see that the developer or “Grantor” for the newly approved development starts selling his lots relatively soon after approval of the subdivision, so we often see multiple entries by the developer/Grantor in the year or two following subdivision approval.  The entries in the Grantor Indexes usually contain a brief description of the property being conveyed.  So, e.g., if Burton Larson owned the property that was approved in 1940 as the “Winter Hill” development, and if Larson sold three lots of his newly approved development to Manny’s Home Builders, Inc., in 1941, then in the Grantor Index covering 1941, the entry under “Larson” will say something like “Winterhill Lots 6,7 & 8”.  Go and look at the Volume and Page number for that transaction to see the deed by which Larson sold those lots.  If Larson was one of the developers who decided to use the race-based covenants, you’ll see it in that deed.  And, I’ll bet you lunch, you’ll see it in every other deed for every other lot that Larson sells in Winter Hill.
- If I don’t see the offensive covenant in the first deed I choose to review for a given development, I will go and look at one or two other deeds in that development, using the same approach as just described, just to feel a little more confident that I’m not missing something.  
- Sticking with the “Winter Hill” example, if I don’t see the covenants in “Winter Hill” deeds, I scratch that development off my list, and I move on to the next development for which I made notes from the subdivision maps. And, I just go down the list in the same manner as described above.
- There are some additional tips and hints that I use, but the above steps essentially describe what I do.


### Search Digitized Property Records {-}
In 2023, June Gold began to search for racially restrictive covenants in her hometown(?) of Hamden Connecticut, and as a retired attorney, offered her pro bono services to residents to void them using the 2021 state law.

Earlier in Hamden see @tuhusVestigesRacismLive1994

Searching covenants in Hamden became easier than most other Connecticut towns because the Town Clerk contracted with a service to digitize all land records from (date)
As of early 2024, the [Avenu Insights & Analytics platform](https://www.uslandrecords.com/ctlr/) online holdings are publicly viewable, beginning from certain years in selected Connecticut towns, as shown in table X.[@avenuinsightsandanalyticsConnecticutLandRecords2024] Note that the earliest year generally refers to a digitized Land Index or images of specific Recorded Land documents, and that associated maps may be available for different time periods. See also Avenu's [US Land Records platform] for selected other states. Check the Avenue site platform or individual Town Clerk land record offices for details.

TODO  
- start Google Sheet and transform to CSV, then Markdown table https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1t6UFa-y7HmiulmLxydlfXevpquFRF5JZD7OsBxdq0R4/edit?usp=sharing
- list all CT sites and earliest dates from platforms
  - https://recordhub.cottsystems.com
  - https://connecticut-townclerks-records.com/
  https://cotthosting.com/ctwesthartford/
  - https://cotthosting.com/CTNHAVENExternal/
  -

June's process:
- began with family member who discovered racially restrictive covenant in their property deed
- The Town of Hamden worked with a vendor to digitize their property records since (YEAR?) and make them publicly viewable online, primarily for use by title searchers working for real estate lawyers. (Official name and LINK) Online property records for the Town of Hamden are quite robust, allowing her to conduct a search from her computer screen, rather than going in-person to the property records room at Town Clerk's office.
- But online searches of town property records are constrained in several ways. First, there is not yet "full-text" search capability, meaning she *cannot* easily search across scanned documents of property deeds for key words and phrases, such as "white race." Second, online property records are primarily organized to search by names of owners, transaction date, and volume number, but not by street address. So title searching requires hunting backwards in time from the current owner to prior owners.
- When she has a name for property with a known covenant, she can trace back the transfer of ownership through the volume and page numbers, sometimes over several transactions, to the 1930s-40s covenant, as shown in the screencast
- After locating one property with a racially restrictive covenant, she can search the ownership paper trail of neighboring homes, especially those located in the same subdivision created by the developer, and filed on 1930s-40s map that has also been digitized in the Town Clerk's property records.
- Likewise, after identifying one real estate developer who added a racially restrictive covenant to a land record, you can search for other properties owned by the same developer. Give example...
- To identify present-day owners of neighboring properties that may have racially restrictive covenants, she searches the Hamden tax assessor property database, which allows searching by street to find the owners of each property. For example, if Carmalt Road is a likely area, she can look up the street listing for current owners of each house, and use their names to search the trail of ownership in the property records database.
- Also, after finding a racially restrictive covenant in one property record volume, she also searches for similar documents (such as "agreement" or "warranty deed") in the same or adjacent volumes. Also, can use the Town's tax assessment map to identify the geographic outlines of 1930s-40s subdivisions to hunt for possible covenants.
-






*[About the authors:](authors.html) Katie Campbell Levasseur (Trinity 2011) conducted research on restrictive property records and co-authored this essay with Jack Dougherty.*
