## Redlining Maps

RETHINK and focus on historical discovery and how-to

When we first drafted this chapter a decade ago, many people were unfamiliar with the concept of *redlining*. In this geographical form of discrimination, institutions stop making investments--such as home mortgage loans--not just to individuals, but by drawing "red lines" around entire neighborhoods. Most people who had heard the term still lacked a clear understanding how redlining actually operated, as housing disinvestment intensified racial and economic segregation in cities and suburbs, because clear evidence was not easily accessible. But something changed.

During the Great Depression of the 1930s, when the US federal government began to fund mortgage lending programs to address the housing crisis, some Black newspapers writers began reporting their suspicions of (fill in and confirm Mitchey?). Decades later during the 1960s and '70s, Chicago researchers and community activists popularized the term "redlining" by pointing to..... But both groups based their claims largely on anecdotal evidence of people who were told by lenders that no loans could be made in their neighborhoods. @finleyChicagoFreedomMovement2015a; @llinoislegislativeinvestigatingcommissionRedliningDiscriminationResidential1975

But more compelling evidence of redlining later appeared in maps. In 1985, historian Ken Jackson resurfaced the hidden role of the US federal government's Home Owners' Loan Corporation (HOLC) in redlining cities and suburbs during the 1930s Depression. (Add 1-sentence description) But Jackson's famous Crabgrass Frontier book featured only a black-and-white sketch of a redlining map for one area, Newark, New Jersey (check), as shown below (image of book cover and page). (insert another descriptive sentence and Jackson quote about general impact) By the early 2000s, a younger generation of historians with digital tools, most notably Amy Hillier, brought redlining maps out of archives and into living color on our computer screens (as shown in image below). Also, Hillier's generation began to challenge some of Jackson's generalizations. All agreed that redlining demonstrated racist intentions of federal officials and financial lenders, but was its impact as strong as many believed? Or did other government-run mortgage programs, such as Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans, do more damage than HOLC redlining?

Side by side images: Jackson's book cover with B&W page; Hillier's website

To make sense of these new debates over redlining, in YEAR I went to the US National Archives II building near Washington DC to bring local history back home to Hartford. A long search finally led to a paper X by Y size four-color HOLC maps of Hartford and two suburbs and neighborhood appraisal documents from 1937. Thanks to the National Archives' policy on sharing public document, I carried a portable flatbed scanner and laptop into the reading room, flipped upside down to scan each square over the oversize map on the tabletop. Back in Hartford, each map scan was digitally stitched together to recreate the full-size image (as shown below). No one in Hartford, except the federal field agent and perhaps a small number of mortgage lenders, had ever seen this map, created over 80 years ago.

Image: static redlining map

To make Hartford's redlining history more publicly accessible, I collaborated with Michael Howser and his team from MAGIC, the aptly-named Map and Geographic Information Center at the University of Connecticut Libraries, to create an interactive map with historical documents in YEAR. We published our first edition on the proprietary Google Maps platform, and later shifted to the open-source Leaflet code platform (as shown below). Now anyone with internet access can click on the HOLC's color-coded neighborhoods, to view direct evidence of how racist, elitist, and nativist influences in federal housing policies intensified racial and economic segregation in our community.

Digital historians rapidly expanded public access to redlining maps. By 2016, Robert Nelson and collaborators published Mapping Inequality, the most extensive digital collection of HOLC redlining maps across the nation... In its third edition in 2023, it now includes 2xx metropolitan areas, approximately X percent of the estimated 2yy places mapped by HOLC (as shown below).
