



	 Golden era of HPS ed leaders:\[ Find if Burpee uses this phrase\] "Appreciation of the spreading out of the city caused the building of" Weaver HS (1924) and Bulkeley HS (1927), p.837 Burpee ; first Weaver principal William Cross Holden had training in science, law, religion at Univ of Maine; first Bulkeley principal Gustave Feingold had degrees from Trinity and Harvard (including PhD); at same time, HPHS principal Clement Hyde had AB Harvard, honorary degrees from Trinity and Yale, and was "assistant in physics at Harvard and Radcliffe from 1892 to 1924" p838, Burpee 1928; 
	 [if appropriate here] First District school in Hartford: In 1928, there are 23 elem schools in Hartford; the "dean of teachers" in the state is Charles Ames, supervisor of Brown (First District) School; "Twenty-five years ago the most of his pupils were Jewish; today about 90 per cent are Italian." p838; current enrollment about 1,800; "Some of the most distinguished men of the city graduated at this the most central of all the schools." p841, Burpee




STRANDS: 
- Instead, Hartford's present-day reputation is one of the poorest cities in the US, with predominantly Black and Latino residents, surrounded by one of the wealthiest metropolitan regions in the nation, where most suburban residents are White.
- outlying rural towns were not the centers of wealth and privilege that we typically identify as the suburbs today. Moreover, rural town schools were widely viewed as steps behind the prestigious city public school system, as described in more detail in a later section. Newcomers to the Hartford region are sometimes astounded to learn about the stark economic and racial disparities.
- When we hear words like city and suburb in our present-day minds, most people associate them with headline phrases of sharp disparity. 
- Flip through the news channels or a local paper and these headlines will jump out at you, particularly on schools. 
- Headlines and television news programs shout out low test scores. . . .   
- By contrast, suburban school districts, in our present-day minds, exemplify higher status and success. 
- People move to outlying suburbs, such as Avon and West Hartford, Connecticut for the “good schools”
- Families often try to move out of city to pursue their dreams in the suburbs, and suburban leaders sometimes defend their homes/schools from outsider they perceive to be unwelcome intruders. This is what we consider “normal” today.

 This chapter centers on the intersection of development politics and consumer markets, since both stories -- social structures and individual actions -- shaped metropolitan Hartford. . . . It tells the story of Hartford and three suburbs -- Avon, Bloomfield, and West Hartford -- and how they sharply diverged by competing against one another through development politics (exclusive zoning and school finance) and intensified consumerism (real estate marketing and school rating systems). 
In 1900, the rural farming community of Avon began as the least wealthy of the three, but its 1960s-70s economic development strategy (based largely on housing and schools) catapulted it into the most elite suburb in the region. Similarly, West Hartford and Bloomfield competed as early streetcar suburban communities in the 1920s, but their paths diverged sharply in the post-war era as real estate agents actively steered blacks into Bloomfield and whites to West Hartford, where residential zoning and school attendance boundaries also fostered socioeconomic stratification.

****

One of the last times the Hartford Courant referred to HPHS has one of the best high schools was a 19930110HC sports-page story that quoted some teachers who proud to work there, including former teacher of the year; "not just a 'basketball' school"
***
	 According to Burbee 1928, the metro territory has increasing infrastructure for post WWI climb:
New York, New Haven, and Hartford Railroad system for shipping
Hartford Electric Light Company, national efficiency leader
Hartford Gas Company capabilities increasing
Southern New England Telephone Company
trolley service being supplemented and often replaced by bus service (around p. 860)
Link: Map: What types of regional infrastructure supported Greater Hartford in 1920s-30s?
Design notes: Thinking about layering regional infrastructure maps (MDC water/sewer, trolley and train service, electrical grid? etc) on top of Greater Hartford circa 1930, to illustrate the types of governmental and commercial services that did extend beyond municipal boundaries.
	 But public schooling and housing did not become part of regional infrastructure. In fact, it moved in opposite direction. Show that 1929 Metropolitan District regionalism for water, health was not given authority over schools, or housing-schooling related topics, other than sewer lines?  -- 19290130HC MDC vote
TO DO: Hartford's 1908 extensive streetcar system, described in Hartford Trolleys (Arcadia 2004, at SJC 974.63 H328HT); Hartford County Trolleys (Arcadia, 2005, at WHL)

***
Mary-Frances L MacKie, Avon, Connecticut: An Historical Story (Canaan, NH: Phoenix Publishing (for Avon Historical Society), 1988), pp. 40-2, 77;

                                                                                                    
HPHS entering class of 1904, lists students by names and schools; includes each subdistrict in Hartford, plus parochial schools, plus "Out of Town and Private Schools" [but no breakdown, and perhaps less than 2% out of town?] -- 19000629HC story; 19000630HC Wethersfield story lists 5 entering HPHS from this town alone
"Hartford Public High School Students Take Good Place" at Yale is subhead; "[T]ake a look at the boys up here for their 'entrance exams' They gatehr here from all over the world, from public and private fitting schools and home tutors, a democratic lot,. . . And to the Hartford citizen comes the gratifying thought that of them all, none will give better account of themselves in all examinations than teh boys from the Hartford Public high School." 19000629HC