November 2019

The 1930s federal Home Owners’ Loan Corporation (HOLC) program created Residential Security Maps (or what we today call “redlining” maps) for about 200 areas in the US. My friend Robert Nelson at U of Richmond and his team have created the most extensive collection of HOLC maps online, with this thoughtful introduction.

You can see all of their digitized CT maps here:

Hartford-West Hartford-East Hartford (which I focus on in my book here)
New Britain
New Haven
Stamford
Darien
New Canaan
Waterbury

According to Robert’s records, notes from scholar Amy Hillier, and my own notes from the National Archives, two more CT maps reportedly exist but have not yet been digitized:
Bridgeport
New London



Feb 2019

Hi Robert and LaDale

Thanks again for all of the work you and your teams did with the Mapping Inequality Redlining project.

I’m following up on some loose ends on CT that I emailed Robert about a year or two ago, since people here continue to ask me about this.

If you have digitized maps below that need to be georectified, or reports that need to be transcribed, am happy to provide some free support from Trinity College and the CT Data Collaborative.

When I type “Connecticut” in your site search box, it currently displays entries for these areas:
East Hartford
New Britain
New Haven
Stamford, Darien, New Canaan

Your site map page suggests that there are two additional CT entries, but I don’t see them on the map and cannot access them. Do you have the digital scans?
https://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/sitemap.html
Bridgeport
Waterbury

I have one more CT digital map and report that does not yet appear on your site. Let me know if you want it.
Hartford and West Hartford

Finally, Amy Hillier 2005 mentions one more CT area, but I don’t have it and don’t see it anywhere in your site. Any clue?
New London
