Why write open-access history?

The digital revolution that swept through the information industry challenged many scholars like me to rethink how and why we publish.

why this book is freely available on the web, and how it incorporates richer evidence with argument

This book also contributes to the growth of open-access scholarly digital publishing

Start with one-paragraph clear explanation of the product (and the scholarly review process to come)


Why publish civil rights history in an open-access participatory book online?  
How did it happen this way? (Emphasize frustration with existing publishing avenues and their constraints)
What did it require?

How this differs
Many wonderful books on urban-suburban history are primarily texts, bound in paper
But history deserves




 (draw on WHDA)


Even more true for
- Public history
- Civil rights history
- Spatial history

How did it happen this way?
If you're reading this book, it's very likely that you're freely doing so on some type of digital screen, as it's freely available to view online or download for multiple devices from the public web.

Originally, I envisioned On The Line to be a conventional book, distributed through a publisher that sold copies on paper.

My thinking evolved about why and how I should write history, particularly one that includes stories that were told to me by everyday people . . .  Shouldn't they have access to their own histories? In my first book, I gave

When I began writing this wrote this book in the mid-2000s, the academic publishing industry was in financial turmoil.
Readers of fee-based newspapers and magazines shifted toward the open web, where they could freely view content (often, with annoying ads).  College and university libraries that previously paid outrageous amount of money for journal subscriptions
Anxiety grew around my area of academic publishing, known as scholarly monographs, or 100,000-word books whose readership and sales have declined while prices have risen. I was fortunate that my first book in 2004 was simultaneously published in hardcover and paperback (with respective price tags of X and Y). Since then, some of my colleagues have been less fortunate, as their books have been sold only in hardcover, priced at nearly $100, in a publisher's flawed effort to capture the last remaining bit of revenue from sales to academic libraries (and virtually no one else at that price). If almost no one can afford to read the words that you've labored to write, what's the point?

The so-called digital revolution contributed to much of this change, for better or worse. The web expanded into more homes and schools, and Silicon Valley invented and sold a gajillion mobile reading devices. In academia, open-access advocates, particularly in  the sciences, began to provide sustainable alternatives to for-profit journal empires.

But the digital revolution changed very little about scholarly monographs. Major American historical associations went on defensive.

As a scholar, my interest is to make quality writing more widely accessible, to both professional colleagues and the public.
Academics have rarely made big money from publishing scholarly monographs. (Textbooks are a different beast entirely.)
But my scholarly reputation, which rises or falls based on the quality of my books, depends on whether or not they get into the hands of readers.

The digital revolution offered the hope of making more—and richer—content available than paper alone could deliver.
As an historian of cities and suburbs, I tell stories about how places changed over time; In other words, I can write better history if it's accompanied by a map. The financial decline of scholarly publishing meant that editors refused to include richly-detailed color maps in my monographs. But the digital revolution made it easier for display these maps online, add color to show granularity, and to make them interactive to show change over time. (Try doing that in black and white on paper.)

At first, I began working with a scholarly publisher that offered a paywall solution: put the text and maps on a password-protected website or fee-based download system, to allow them to sell it.
[Footnote: I also explored a hybrid solution: split the book into two parts: the narrative text (which the publisher would copyright and sell as a book, in paper and/or digital), and a companion site of online maps and video clips that would be freely available on the web. But this unnecessarily divided up the content into parts, when its strength was a unified, coherent, highly-illustrated story.)

But the quandary came because this wasn't just my history, but public history. Everyday citizens and civil rights activists had shared their stories with me, which I retold and interpreted as an historian. The publisher could not guarantee that their paywall book platform would be available to public libraries in metropolitan Hartford. While my digitized book would be available to better-resourced college libraries, this model would effectively exclude the readers whose families and neighbors had created this civil rights history. That was a line that I would not cross.

The digital revolution also offered a new deal for enterprising authors. If you're willing to do most of the digital work yourself, there are a handful of scholarly publishers experimenting with open-access book-length works.
U Michigan examples
We had to re-create peer review, which also was broken. .  

Imagine that you're offered the following bargain:  your book can be accessible to anyone with an internet connection, but you need to create it on your own web platform and ask your institution for $2k to cover costs of peer review and editorial (?)
In exchange, anyone with access to the web can freely read your book (and if they prefer print, can purchase a paperback edition at a reasonable cost of less than $30) Your reputation depends on the quality of your words reaching beyond your own little ivory tower. Would you take that deal?





What did it require?
Nearly all of the tools to publish online are open-source and freely available.
What is required was a change in my orientation, a deep rethinking of why we write and for whom, and learning some tools to better accomplish these aims. Relearning how to write is a familiar routine. When I went to college in 1983, I walked into my dorm room carrying an electric typewriter, and four years later walked out with my papers on a diskette. (Computers were relatively expensive, and I could not afford to buy one until 1988.)

When I started this book in 2009, I did not realize that I would need to write three other books with colleagues in order to create the basis for this scholarly monograph. In one sense these were diversions from the central task of writing the book, but they really needed to happen to bring my head further along into the process.

The first book was writing history in the digital age with co-editor Kristen Nawrotzki. This text help to create a stronger community of historians who were engaged in sharing our history online questions that arose with that shift in our field. It also was my first open access book, and prompted us to make a stronger principled argument for why publishing scholarly history as an open access book was preferable. The arguments for this.

The second book was web writing with co-editor Tennyson O'Donnell and support from my wonderful colleagues at Trinity College. While the primary focus was pedagogy, this book helped me find the right tools and the best way to communicate about them for posing editing revising, receiving feedback, and publishing online. This was a press box project, which laid the groundwork for the platform for this book.

The third book, which is only partially complete, is data visualization for everyone. The tools for creating scratch that tools for transforming spreadsheets of data into interactive charts and maps have changed dramatically over the past few years, to the point now where one does not need extensive coding skills to create outstanding products for the web. In this third book I had to learn the tutorials scratch that had to learn the tools with place students in order to write tutorials for my students and general readers about how to design these items, these digital elements which actually, which appear inside the station.

CONCLUDE SECTION with: Those are my explicit intentions in writing this book. Now it's your job to decide whether it meets those goals, and other themes you may find while reading between the lines.

************

reorganize ideas and insert these:
Open Access movement and publishing
Digital tools for the job argument:
this book relies upon historical GIS to tell stories of spatial history (cite Hillier et al)
it also relies upon data visualizations to help readers identify broad trends in large datasets (cite Flowing Data et al)
digital repositories to hold oral history interview recordings and transcripts, archival documents, etc.
WordPress technology to handle reader comments, and Omeka technology to handle user-contributed source materials
for all of these tools, digital publishing is a more welcoming format than print-only publications

This book is not only interactive, where individual readers click on objects on a screen), but more importantly, a participatory model of scholarship that engages readers to write comments and dialogue with one another, and make connections by contributing their own stories to to the history archive.
REWRITE as statement: What can we learn from exploring the past through other people's eyes, or viewing stories and comments from other perspectives?



During the period in which I have been working on On The Line, the publishing industry at large (and academic publishing in particular) experienced some dramatic changes. [list them: rising book and journal subscription costs, the first generation of e-books on library computers and mobile consumer devices, lighter laptops and hand-held tablets for browsing the web,  experiments in open peer review] Let's refer to it all of this as the "digital revolution," though the nickname does not fully address the not-entirely-digital crisis in business models among publishers, nor has there been as complete a transformation that one expects from the latter part of that term.

 The digital revolution sparked questions in my mind. As a historian, what is the best way to create, share, and engage others in scholarly communication? In other words, what's the best way to "publish" my second book -- and exactly what do we mean by that term nowadays, given dramatic changes in print and digital platforms?

Many historians still favor printed books as a familiar and reliable mode for sharing knowledge. Books are a stable technology that do not rely upon internet access or operating systems. We enjoy the feel of books in the palms of our hands, the ease of reading wherever we choose to sit, and how they look when we stack up our acquired knowledge on our bookshelves. We can purchase them from local booksellers and online vendors, or borrow them from academic and public libraries (provided that these institutions continue to be supported by tuition and tax dollars). But one serious limitation of printed books is that they promote one-way scholarly communication of ideas, from author to audience. Information is disseminated to readers, who play no part in the knowledge-construction process, unless they also happen to discuss it in a class or book group, send a letter to the author, write a book review, or incorporate it into their own scholarship. Certainly, readers can take the initiative to dialogue with the author or other readers, but printed books, by themselves, are not designed to promote a two-way exchange of ideas.

In this regard, the current generation of e-books face the same problem as print books. Despite the potential of digital technology, the vast majority of today's e-books enable one-way scholarly communication, from author to audience. One editor described e-books as "glorified PDF files," and for the most part, he's right. For example, my college library's ebrary platform has helped me many times when I could not obtain a printed copy. After logging in to the authenticated network, books can be accessed through ordinary web browsers. Readers can flip pages, search for key terms in this book or across others on the same platform, and copy passages to use in our writing. Click to view the current format of a typical library e-book But that's about as far as the digital revolution has currently taken e-books.
Click to view the current format of a typical library e-book.

While Amazon's Kindle e-books have received more media coverage, their product is not much better. True, if I download a sample or purchase a book, I can flip through pages and search key words on my personal computer or mobile device. Also, Kindle e-books allow me to highlight passages, and see those frequently highlighted by other readers. But regarding public access, libraries  appear to be stepping cautiously around Amazon's "terms of use," which restrict Kindle e-books  to "personal, non-commercial use" that the licensee "may not sell, rent, lease, distribute. . . to any third party." Does this allow a library to "lend out" an e-book -- or not? When Library Journal (Oder 2009) asked this question, Amazon's corporate spokesperson said no, while some individual sales representatives said yes, leading to ongoing confusion, reports Inside Higher Ed (Fister 2010). Today, some libraries skirt around the rules by lending out Kindles that contain their only copy of a particular e-book, which they interpret to be within the terms of use agreement, and Amazon appears to be looking the other way. In practice, this means installing a $10-20 e-book inside a $140-200 hardware reader. It certainly boosts Amazon's visibility, but may not be the most cost-effective means for expanding public access to scholarship.

A third category of scholarly communication is digital history projects, often created by historians and/or archivists to disseminate primary source materials on the web. Two relevant examples for this essay are the Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project at the University of Washington, and the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights History Project at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. (Disclaimer: The latter hosts selected oral history content from my first book.) Both of these digital history websites offer free public access to primary sources -- documents, databases, photos, and videos -- that traditionally would have been hidden deep inside a traditional paper-based archive, or might never have been collected in the first place. Also, since both projects feature the voices of activists from multiple perspectives in the civil rights movement, they suggest alternatives to one-way author-to-audience scholarly communication. Yet spend time browsing both of these digital history projects to be reminded why historians prefer books. Neither project was designed to provide a coherent historical narrative, an interpretive thread that weaves together the disparate pieces to tell us how and why they matter. We still favor books -- print or digital -- because the best of these tell us meaningful stories.

Given our growing experience with print and digital culture, can we imagine a better way to create and share scholarly knowledge? If we designed a format that encouraged writers and readers from different locations to interact, and learn from one another, what might it look like? Several examples already point the way toward this new category of scholarly communication, which I refer to as web-books, meaning socially networked texts that invite participants to read, reflect, and respond, using a typical online web browser. (Hint: You're looking at a web-book right now.) Web-books seek to merge the best of conventional books and digital innovation: intellectual coherence and reader interactivity. But don't let the technology overshadow the idea. What's important here is to rethink how scholars communicate with our peers and the public, and to open up the process of constructing, sharing, and evaluating knowledge. The web is simply a tool to help make it happen more easily.

Several innovative web-book models have recently appeared in the humanities, and the most relevant example for historians is the Long Civil Rights Movement (the LCRM project) by the University of North Carolina Press. With Mellon Foundation support, UNC Press and its partner organizations developed the LCRM platform, which currently hosts 50 full-text civil rights history books, including digital tools that allow users to share paragraph-level comments, questions, and links with other readers. While the LCRM is designed to sell access to copyrighted books behind a subscription-based pay wall, free registration for the pilot version is currently open to faculty, librarians, and graduate students through December 2010. (For those without access, view the free LCRM demonstration video.)


How do readers actually interact with LCRM web-books? During the early months of this pilot phase, only a handful of texts have been commented upon, but the possibilities are intriguing. For example, Ansley Erickson arranged to register her undergraduate/graduate history of education class on the LCRM pilot platform, and assigned them to write paragraph-level comments on the first chapter of James Anderson book, The Education of Blacks in the South (1988). Without specific guidance, her students began to interpret the significance of the text in their eyes, and some directly or indirectly commented on other classmates' entries. Those of us who have taught classes using a course management system (such as Blackboard or the open-source Moodle) may have already experienced students commenting on other students' writing, in the same classroom. But what might happen if Erickson's students wrote comments that were viewed -- and commented upon -- by students at another university, perhaps in the South? How might learning change?

Another disclaimer: My book also is available on the LCRM platform, and I have actively promoted this innovation during the free access pilot phase. In addition, the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights History Project and I have experimented with inserting thought-provoking questions and primary source links into the LCRM web-book edition, to encourage readers to make connections between the book and the digital history project. See this freely accessible compilation of questions we inserted into the More than One Struggle LCRM edition. Will readers respond to these ideas, or create their own connections, or ignore them altogether? We'll have to wait and see.

Elsewhere in the humanities, innovative web-books have featured "open peer review" as a means to invigorate scholarly communication. MediaCommonsPress recently hosted an open review edition of a leading literary journal, Shakespeare Quarterly, where authors' submissions received paragraph-level comments from about 40 readers, some who were self-selected and some experts invited by the editor. Both the Chronicle of Higher Education (Howard 2010) and The New York Times (Cohen 2010) reported on the success of this digital humanities experiment and compared it related trends in other academic fields, such as the sciences. Kathleen Fitzpatrick, a professor of media studies at Pomona College and a founder of MediaCommonsPress, previously released a full draft of her book manuscript, Planned Obsolescence: Publishing, Technology, and the Future of the Academy (2009), for open peer review in an agreement with her prospective publisher, NYU Press, which simultaneously sent it out for blind review.


Humanities scholars also can gain insights from socially-networked web-books such as Candide 2.0 (public commentary on Voltaire's 1759 classic, hosted by the New York Public Library), and Hacking the Academy (a crowd-sourced book organized by the Center for History and New Media at George Mason University). Even those of us with limited computer skills can readily create web-books using open-source WordPress software plug-ins, such as digress.it and its predecessor, CommentPress. (Read more in our "How it Works" section.) Readers: please use the comment feature of this web-book to share your knowledge and recommend other scholarly web-books that encourage users to read, reflect, and respond.

Digital writing on the web offers several advantages over print and e-books. First, authors whose arguments rely upon evidence that cannot easily be captured in the text of a conventional book benefit from increased flexibility. Visual historians can link to images and video, economic historians can link to data sets, and spatial historians can link to interactive maps. (By contrast, Amazon's current best selling historical e-books with audio and/or video clips provide only a limited selection of media content, packaged inside the proprietary book file, not linked to the public web.) By openly sharing historical source materials, web-based scholarship enables readers to examine the evidence and formulate their own interpretations, rather than relying solely on the author's judgment.

Second, digital scholarship does not necessarily conflict with our desire to preserve the past and hold printed copies in our hands. Archival servers, stable "permalink" addresses, and thoughtful planning can maintain our web-based history, and our attachment to paper can be satisfied by "print-on-demand" services.

Third, socially networked web-books allow substantive and speedy communication between writers and readers. As authors, we cannot judge whether our own writing successfully communicates complex ideas without receiving some type of feedback from a wide range of audiences. When publishing an scholarly print or e-book, we generally have little idea how it was received unless a reader happens to contact us directly, or an academic journal prints a review, typically a year or two later. But online paragraph-level commenting and page-view data can tell us exactly which passages readers praised, panned, or never bothered to read.

Do scholarly authors really want to know what our readers think? What if they criticize our ideas on the very same digital pages we labored over? Do we genuinely wish to co-create and evaluate knowledge in public -- or do we prefer our traditional norms of working in private? Of course, most of the web-book models cited above moderate comments to maintain civil discourse (and filter out spam). When attempting to explain this web-book concept to colleagues, I have found myself coining slogans like "when social media meets scholarship," or worse, "the Academic Book meets FaceBook." After the audience groans, I am the first to question whether or not this is a good direction for our scholarship to head, but I'm also willing to try and see what -- if anything -- might happen.

Proprietary versus public web-books

REWRITE BELOW, and think about how publishers explain their own merits (see Am Ass Univ Press report PDF in Jennifer Howard march 2011, zotero cite)

If academics embrace web-books and other innovative digital formats for scholarly communication (and that's a big "if"), then we will need to grapple with proprietary versus public models, and their deeper implications for our work. Judging from the few examples at present, it appears that proprietary web-books will be designed to sell texts through a fee-based authentication system, while public web-books will offer open access to anyone who visits the site. Compare these closed and open systems on four dimensions that matter to scholars:

1) Distribution and Access: Publishers can market proprietary web-books through their existing distribution channels, which are designed to match the right content with the right audience. But someone -- either the individual reader or an institutional library -- needs to purchase access to this proprietary product. By contrast, a public web-book is freely available on the internet, if readers know how and where to find it.

2) Status: Most scholars strive for higher status, which in publishing circles often means signing on with a more prestigious press. Gatekeepers to academic success -- the deans and faculty committees that hire and tenure junior faculty -- often operate with a loosely-defined pecking order of publishers, those at the top perceived as more selective than others. But these distinctions are blurry and subject to change with market conditions. Also, scholars (and everyone else) often confuse status with a different characteristic: quality.

3) Quality: We all agree that quality matters, but we lack agreement on how scholarly work should be judged (particularly in the humanities), and at what stage(s) of the publishing process it should happen. On one hand, academic presses employ editors and external reviewers to filter their products prior to publication, to signal that books meet their standards and are deemed worth reading. On the other hand, a public web-book reverses this equation by placing content onto the internet and relying on reader comments to sort out what is -- and is not -- worth reading, rather than market-driven publishing. Both exercise a form of peer review, but at different stages in the scholarly communication process. Fitzpatrick (2009) argues this point:

    In a self-multiplying scholarly commons, some kind of assessment of the material being published (or having been published) remains important, but not because of scarce resources; instead, what remains scarce are time and attention. For this reason, peer review needs to be put not in the service of gatekeeping, or determining what should be published for any scholar to see, but of filtering, or determining what of the vast amount of material that has been published is of interest or value to a particular scholar. As Clay Shirky has argued, "Filter-then-publish, whatever its advantages, rested on a scarcity of media that is a thing of the past. The expansion of social media means that the only working system is publish-then-filter" (Here Comes Everybody 98). . . [Read this Fitzpatrick (2009) passage in context]

4) Money: While some imagine academic publishing to be the meritocracy of scholarly writing, this ignores market forces. Given two equally "excellent" book manuscripts -- one on a popular topic, and the other on an obscure one -- which one is more likely to receive a rejection letter that praises the author's work but bases its decision on the lack of a commercially viable market? Currently, most publishers -- whether for-profit trade presses or not-for-profit academic presses -- rely upon a stream of book sales revenue to pay for editorial, production, and marketing services. By definition, freely available resources on the web do not generate revenue, so publishers usually cannot afford to give away their proprietary products. Money is a most definitely a key factor, but one that needs to be separated from distribution & access, status, and quality.

For scholars weighing the merits of proprietary versus public web-books, which of these factors should we consider? It seems that we can quickly dispense with the money factor, based on current practices with print and e-book monographs. Correct me if I'm mistaken, but my understanding is that a moderately successful book published by an academic press sells around 1,000 copies. If we assume a royalty of 5 percent on books costing $30 each, this generates only $1,500 for the author, who is likely to have paid an equal sum in out-of-pocket expenses for photocopying, copyright permissions, indexing, etc. True, the financial payoff for a popular textbook or trade-press book is different, but most scholars did not get into this business for the money. Furthermore, I contend that scholars easily confuse status with quality, often preferring to let the relative prestige of a press to substitute for informed judgment about scholarship itself. The quality of a book is a separate issue from its format, whether print, e-book, or web-book.

For those still on the fence about proprietary versus public web-books, this brings us back to the first factor: distribution and access. As an author, my worst nightmare is to publish scholarship under an exclusive copyright contract that locks down my ideas in ways that make them nearly inaccessible to readers. All of us are watching the price of academic hardcovers steadily climb upward, with fewer guarantees of less inexpensive paperbacks on the horizon. Two years ago I saw one colleague's hardcover-only book priced at $79, and two weeks ago, another colleague's listed at $95. Have we reached the point where the price of a hardcover academic monograph costs more than Amazon's Kindle reader? Some believe that e-books will save the publishing industry, but if licensing agreements hamper library access at the same time as their funding support is in jeopardy, then we risk losing an important segment of our audience. As an author, my priority is to write quality books that readers can easily access, not to play money or status games.



The proprietary scholarship problem in higher education: see how K Fitzgerald described this; if not in her book, then see interview here, by Lisa Klarr 2011 in Zotero, quote from Fitzgerald: "Part of the problem is precisely that, the intellectual property that scholars are creating--and that we're being paid by our institutions to create--isn't housed in the databases of the library, but is rather closed in proprietary databases to which our libraries may or may not be able to afford to subscribe. We're funded, in other words, by our institutions and by public granting agencies to produce certain kinds of knowledge, which we then give away (usually for free and sometimes even at further cost to ourselves, our institutions, or our granting agencies) to commercial publishers, who then license it back to the institution via the library at often extortive rates.  And the licenses that our libraries purchase come with enormous restrictions, such that even the libraries of state universities can only make their holdings available to those directly affiliated with the institution, closing the general public out of engaging with the knowledge that we have produced. So clearly somethings got to give--but my fear is that its going to take a full-on breakdown in the current system of knowledge production and dissemination for a new open system to take root."

Can open access publishing solve the proprietary scholarship problem in higher education?
The proprietary scholarship problem:
colleges & universities pay scholars a salary via tuition dollars, with additional support from research grants through foundations or public funds (symbol: scholar is generic head with idea bulb; dollar bill)
scholars produce knowledge, which we more or less give to publishers in exchange for broader distribution, with peer-review and prestige (symbols: several papers come in & one gets a gold star)
some publishers are non-profit organizations while others are for-profit corporations(?)
publishers sell this knowledge back to college & university libraries in the form of books and journal subscriptions, and also to individual students for required books in class (symbols: book & journal; more dollar bills)
book and journal costs are rapidily growing; royalties to scholars are generally small (symbol: nickel for author)
colleges & university libraries and students generally pay TWICE for proprietary knowledge
"Part of the problem is precisely that, the intellectual property that scholars are creating--and that we're being paid by our institutions to create--isn't housed in the databases of the library, but is rather closed in proprietary databases to which our libraries may or may not be able to afford to subscribe. We're funded, in other words, by our institutions and by public granting agencies to produce certain kinds of knowledge, which we then give away (usually for free and sometimes even at further cost to ourselves, our institutions, or our granting agencies) to commercial publishers, who then license it back to the institution via the library at often extortive rates.  And the licenses that our libraries purchase come with enormous restrictions, such that even the libraries of state universities can only make their holdings available to those directly affiliated with the institution, closing the general public out of engaging with the knowledge that we have produced. So clearly somethings got to give--but my fear is that its going to take a full-on breakdown in the current system of knowledge production and dissemination for a new open system to take root."
The open access publishing proposal: what if colleges & university libraries supported their own forums for scholars to disseminate knowledge online? Could it be done in way that maintains quality without paying twice?
UMichigan Press -- free online publication under library budget; editorial acquisitions and peer review prior to publication
MediaCommons Press -- open peer review as part of online publication process
Link: Visualization: Can open access publishing solve the proprietary scholarship problem in higher education?
Design notes: create video in style of Google production solution animations; see symbol notes above



A public right to civil rights history?
Now consider the same question about proprietary versus public web-books from the perspective of readers. This is especially important for civil rights scholars and other writers whose books tell stories about communities of people relegated to the margins of history. Do the activists who created this civil rights history have a right to read these stories in an accessible format? What about the present-day community members whose lives continue to be shaped by this history? Do they have the right to borrow a history book that their local library can reasonably afford, or a right to freely read it on a publicly accessible website? Taking it one step further, do these same activists and community members have the right to respond to an author's interpretation of their history in the same forum it appeared in, such as a public web-book or journal?

Of course, there is no right to knowledge in the US Constitution, but as the digital revolution continues, all scholars should consider the ethical implications of publishing our scholarship in proprietary versus public formats. In particular, civil rights historians should think twice about locking up a community's stories behind subscriber-only pay walls, which restrict reader feedback to the members of libraries that can afford the fees, and whose voices will be heard.

Perhaps there is some middle ground that meets the interests of readers, authors, and publishers. I am intrigued by publisher's free-access experiments such as UNC Press's LCRM project, the University of Pennsylvania Press (which sold a print version of Dan Cohen and Roy Rosenzweig's Digital History (2005) while agreeing to allow the authors to post a free online version), and the new business model illustrated by the University of Michigan Press and Library partnership on the "digital culture books" series, which are freely available online and sold in print under a Creative Commons license. Kathleen Fitzpatrick's Planned Obsolescence appears destined to exist in two formats: a full draft of her book with commentary on a public website, and a proprietary final draft to be sold by NYU Press. When asked at a recent conference which one would be the authoritative version, Fitzpatrick wisely replied, "Both." I can imagine a similar dual-format arrangement by academic publishers and scholars doing community-based research: a public web-book that community members can freely access through local libraries, and proprietary print and digital versions sold to broader audiences.

These are the questions on my mind as I draft chapters and prepare a preview of the On the Line public web-book, and face important decisions about the best way to publish in the digital era. Down the hall from my office, a friendly philosopher reminds me that:

    Knowledge has the very nice property that it is enlarged by giving it away. As a person teaches, or perhaps researches on behalf of a community group, everybody learns more (Lloyd, circa 2002).

While I'm uncertain if this claim that sharing knowledge increases its value also covers chefs' special recipes and national security secrets, it certainly applies to the field of history, especially civil rights. Years ago, when moving from dissertation to book, I learned that storytelling guides readers through the complexity of the past. Today, as I move further into digital scholarship, I am learning the importance of maintaining public access to read, reflect, and respond to our shared civil rights history.  
END OF WRITING HISTORY ESSAY 2010

ARE ALL OF THESE POINTS INCLUDED ABOVE?
	 a) Need feasible means of telling stories with maps, which is not feasible in print.  The "long civil rights movement" is also a spatially widening one, and our city and suburban histories are connected by the very lines that separate us. . . .To convey this spatial history of the Northern civil rights movement, we are creating interactive maps to help reader visualize the power of these boundary lines, past and present.  . . .Integrating these sources into the story allows me to ask important side-questions, such as how did historical actors use maps to tell stories about civil rights? What were different maps designed to show -- or hide?. . . REPHRASED: For example, how do we tell civil rights stories with map lines? How do people create and interpret maps to tell stories about spatial change in cities and suburbs? What do they choose to highlight in these maps -- or hide?
	 How have civil rights activists, government officials, and the mass media designed and interpreted maps about racial and socioeconomic inequalities in the Hartford region over time? What did they choose to highlight -- or hide? With the expansion of desktop cartography, each of these groups have increasingly added visual representations of urban-suburban change to their lawsuits, reports, and news coverage. Every maps tells a particular story, based on decisions about how to present selected data for the intended audience. For example, how do different maps portray recent Black and Latino suburbanization in the Hartford region? Do they present a civil rights struggle that succeeded? Or has only just begun? Or do they hide this information due to fears of provoking white flight to more distant suburbs? Drawing on geographer Mark Monmonier's How to Lie With Maps (1996), this research will digitize maps created by different groups since the 1960s and illustrate alternative ways the same data could have been presented with historical GIS.
It will explore how civil rights activists, government officials, and the local mass media designed and interpreted maps about racial and socioeconomic inequality in the Hartford region over time, and what their decisions to highlight (or hide) tell us about the most salient cultural and political divisions in their minds
ADD: Susan Schulten "writing a book about the rise of thematic mapping in the United States." (http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/12/09/visualizing-slavery/) and see also Biblio entry
	 How do people construct and interpret maps to tell stories about spatial change in cities and suburbs? How do they use maps to talk about color and/or money, or avoid talking about these issues?
	 Racial change in suburbs: a sign of civil rights success or white uneasiness?
	 John Powell argues that there are two ways to "tell stories about maps": Individualistic (blame the indiv) versus Structural (blame social, pol, econ structures)
	 b) History belongs to all, and civil rights history is too valuable to privatize.
	 c) Web-book enables more communication from reader-to-author, and by reader-to-reader. . . Welcomes contributions. . . This web-book also includes a floating commenting tool (called digress.it, a WordPress plug-in) to encourage readers to share feedback online, and to respond to ideas posted by others. The tool allows users to write general comments about an entire page, or a specific paragraph. See "How to Comment" for a brief tutorial, or simply try it out. Your first comment may be delayed from appearing online for several hours due to screening for spam or inappropriate content.
	 d) Supporting arguments with evidence makes good history, or still yet, allows readers to analyze original sources and write better history.
The web-book format offers different ways to integrate the narrative text and digital archive. Readers of the text can follow a linked source, to explore the author's analysis through direct examination of the evidence. But educators can design innovative lessons in the opposite direction, by starting an historical inquiry with a source material from the archive (such as an interactive map, photograph, document, or data tool), and asking students to formulate their own questions and interpretations to compare to the main text. See the Teaching section for sample lesson plans shared by teachers, and learn how to contribute your own.
	 e) Web-book allows us to ask questions that we did not consider feasible in print-only world. What can we learn from publishing history online, and inviting audiences to comment and contribute sources, in ways that were not feasible in print? How do different audiences interpret this history, and what messages do they take away?

	 The broadest goal of the book is to learn more about people who lived and learned on the other side of the lines. . .

MERGE INTO ABOVE?
We are committed to freely sharing the web-book text and archives at no charge, to maximize public access to our shared civil rights history. Read more about the rationale behind this decision in Jack Dougherty, "Storytelling and Civil Rights: From Dissertation to Book to Web-Book," Writing History (2010).

In addition, we are committed to designing our web technology using open-source code to the extent feasible by our budget and skills, and to operate on any modern  browser, without proprietary software (such as Flash or Silverlight). Although Google Maps itself is not open-source, we have made all of our Google Maps API coding accessible, so that others may explore, modify, and improve it for other uses.

This edition of the web-book has been tested most extensively with Firefox, Google Chrome, and Safari browsers. To reduce screen clutter, we recommending using the Tab Browser setting. In Windows, select Tools>Options>Tabs. In Mac, under the browser name menu, select Preferences>Tabs.
This research is supported by the NEH Fellowships at Digital Humanities Centers program for 2010-11, and our proposal (September 2009) is available for download. Any views, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this website or related publications do not necessarily represent those of the National Endowment for the Humanities.

All content in this web-book (except where noted otherwise) is shared under a Creative Commons license to maximize free public dissemination while ensuring credit to the authors.



What attracted me to history as a discipline was its capacity to teach us true stories from different -- sometimes conflicting -- perspectives on the past.
While researching my first book, I learned so much from listening to Black Milwaukee activists. . . and the written products represented my interpretation of their lives. Thanks to the March on Milwaukee Civil Rights history project, readers can go directly to some of the sources -- oral history interview transcripts and recordings -- and read or listen to how activists explained it in their own words (if you can ignore my questions and interruptions). But when the book was finished, it featured one-way communication -- from author to reader, from so-called expert to novice -- which did not keep a conversation going.
	When I was younger, one of the first books I read that truly sparked my imagination about the potential of history was -- INSERT public history title. Chapters described doing history with neighborhoods, taking primary sources out in van, etc. Redefined what history could become.
	Later came digital history -- also Roy Rosenzweig -- which offered a medium for making these historical connections with the public. What also impressed me was that R and C's book was readable on-line or in print. How on earth did they persuade publisher to do that?
	Book publishing industry is at a crossroads, we read again and again on our favorite free websites.
	Compared to market-driven trade press, academic presses have served as a filter for scholarly works. Peer reviewers provide a valuable service, we are told, in separating the good from the not-so-good
But Kathleen Fitzpatrick has pointed out several reasons why the current model of academic publishing is not sustainable; not really separating quality alone, since market decisions do factor in; [see notes from her text] Digital era changes things when anyone can effectively put their words out on the World Wide Web, or sell a print-on-demand book or e-book on Amazon. Instead, she argues for reversing the "filter-then-publish" model to "publish-then-filter." [check her wording] Given that there is so much print and digital material generated, we still need filters. . . but that is the purpose of book reviews and extended review essays, other authors' bibliographic citations, inclusion in faculty syllabi, and even on-line reader comments on booksellers' websites.
	Whether the winds of change contine to blow academic publishing in new directions, the forecast prompted me to reflect deeply on my motivations for writing and publishing another historical book. What did I want to happen? And what was the right thing to do? [look at UNC Press correspondence] While negotiating contract with academic publisher, my motivations became clearer. . .
	Academic book publishing is NOT about the money.. . .
	Producing quality writing, which actually makes its way to readers' eyes, matters more to me than prestige of a press. My first book was judged to be of sufficiently high quality to win two prizes and an honorable mention by other historians. Several organizations invited me to deliver presentations at their campuses and community centers. Some professors assigned it to their undergraduate and graduate students. But after XX years, the academic press had sold less than 2,000 copies. And this was considered a moderately successful academic book.


	Civil rights history should be accessible -- in all senses of the word -- to the people who created it and continue to live it. My writing tends to focus on local case studies, and Hartford residents should be able to read it -- freely -- through public libraries.
	But this map-based history of metropolitan change and civil rights presented a problem.  Good-quality color maps are very expensive for publishers to print. Moreover, my collaborators at MAGIC and I created some innovative map tools that cannot be captured in a printed book; they contain enormous digital files (by today's standards) and we created web-browser tools for interactively viewing them -- zooming, panning, comparing, etc. Suddenly, the equation shifted: my work was a better fit for digital publishing than traditional books alone.
	Books still matter -- and the text that you're holding is available
BUILD ON "open peer review" and "open questions" that invite multi-directional conversations between readers, so that everyone has the power to "author"
Section header:?
Scholarly Exposition -- with Open Questions?

	Academic publishers still serve as filters -- just that my goal now is to have UNC Press distribute access to the free book on their LCRM platform.



	 This digital book project also includes a public history component that seeks to bring together people from different sides of the lines to learn about one another
This book will become part of the UNC Press' Mellon-funded digital publishing initiative on "The Long Civil Rights Movement." In the on-line version of the book, users will be able to read the full-text of the narrative, follow links to source materials and other readers' comments, and explore interactive maps on their web browsers or e-reader devices. Integrating digital mapping into the book allows me to tell the history of the spatially widening civil rights struggle over metropolitan inequality in ways that would not be feasible in conventional print publishing.
For digital, explain that the core arguments of the book are spatial, about how our metropolitan lives have been shaped by housing and schooling lines, and civil rights activism has had to evolve to keep pace with the lines. While text can describe spatial change, animated and interactive maps are better way to persuasively show the impact of spatial change. Also, offer an invitation to interact and contribute, because many of my readers are smarter than me, and knowledge is created when we dialogue (or draw distinctions) with one another.
We received funding? to develop innovative web-based interactive maps and simulations to add a spatial dimension to U.S. civil rights history. These digital tools have been designed by a team of historians, geographers, digital technologists, and editorial advisors from three organizations: the Cities, Suburbs, and Schools Project at Trinity College; MAGIC, the Map and Geographic Information Center at the University of Connecticut; and the University of North Carolina Press digital initiative, "Publishing the Long Civil Rights Movement." The collaboration draws on our collective strengths in historical analysis, GIS (geographical information systems), and web-based application design. Our historical research and digital products will explain how racial and social class inequalities -- specifically in housing and education -- have changed during the twentieth century in metropolitan Hartford, Connecticut. By design, our project setting is local, though the technology is scalable and lessons transferable to other settings.

 How to read, comment, and contribute your story online
	 We designed the OTL digital history project website to be freely accessible, and to use open-source technology as much as possible.. . .
explain types of maps
describe other types of digitals
[COPY some to GDocs design guide, and reduce other portions]

	 List types of dynamic ebook features and explain value added with example for each [Assuming that introductory chapter is open access, this allows readers to see features demonstrated in browser window]
	 How did boundary lines change over time?
To illustrate how these "invisible" boundaries have changed over time, Living and Learning on the Line will offer web-based interactive historical maps, to help both scholarly and general audiences visualize spatial concepts described in more detail in the narrative book. Given the technical challenges and prohibitive costs of presenting historical time-series maps in traditional paper publications, our project will add an innovative geographic dimension to the emerging field of digital history. Our first prototype, the animated timeline map, depicts historical change through a chronological sequence of individual images, with a user-controlled timeline slider. This format can display historical change in either vector (point or thematic data) or raster format (such as aerial photographs)
	 How did the neighborhood change over time?
For scholarly and general audiences, one of the most common spatial questions about the civil rights era is: How did the neighborhood change over time? Historians who study redevelopment or suburban expansion are most interested in neighborhood contexts as a means of understanding how powerful political, economic, and social forces reshape land-use, transportation, and housing patterns. General audiences often reflect on this topic in more personal terms. How did the "old neighborhood" of my extended family change over time? Or what did my current neighborhood look like before we arrived here?
	To help answer these questions for both types of users, our team will develop innovative web-based interactive products such as our second prototype, dual-window linked maps (also available on the demo website above). These dual maps portray historical change by pairing images from two points in time in adjacent windows, with a linked controller to synchronize their location and scale. This format is more effective for allowing users to zoom into a particular area, or when using a small (or irregular) number of time intervals. The web sample displays statewide imagery from MAGIC's public web map service (aerial photos from 1934 and 2008) using Google Maps API coding. (See technical details in the appendix).
	Funding from this grant will enable us to add two more innovative features to dual-window linked maps. First, our historical researchers will identify special places of interest relevant to Hartford's civil rights history in the aerial photos (such as the post-war creation and demolition of the Charter Oak Terrace public housing project, or the construction of the I-84 interstate highway that intensified racial divisions), and create links from the historical narrative to the zoomed-in dual maps to show spatial change over time. Second, our GIS technology specialists will create the option for users to overlay transparent thematic data maps on top of the aerial photography, to visualize historical changes captured by census data, such as a neighborhood's racial composition or housing costs at two different points in time. While thematic data map layers are currently available elsewhere (such as American FactFinder), our application will advance the field by placing historical data layers on top of aerial photographs and linking them with the user controls to zoom into a street address or neighborhood. Once again, our case study will focus on the metropolitan Hartford region of Connecticut, but the technology we develop is scalable and can be adapted for other digital map collections.
	 Historical simulations  -- see details below
	 Historical data visualizations -- explore longitudinal and spatial concepts with time-series data visualizations and/or historical maps
	 Create your own map (using MAGIC mashups, or Social Explorer)

	 Open Questions that invite reader comments for a question that the author cannot answer or is looking for feedback. If this was a conventional book, I would have dropped these "dead ends" because I couldn't complete them. But given the web's opportunities to interact with readers and create knowledge, it offers authors like me the freedom to acknowledge what we don't know, and seek out the wisdom of others
	 Paired Photos: Past and Present  usually pair an historical photograph with a contemporary image on the same screen, usually taken from the same point of view, placed side-by-side to encourage direct comparisons.
	 Interactive data investigations -- illustrate numerical reasoning in the narrative [and test hypotheses] with quicktable-style questions and exercises to analyze and visually represent data
example: Guess how many suburban students of color participate in magnet program. Use raw data in quicktable format, calculate the percentage of students enrolled in interdistrict magnet schools (by city vs. suburbs, by racial group, etc.)
example: How much does the federal government subsidize home buyers through the mortgage interest deduction? Compare 1040 forms for comparable renter vs owner
example: How has national-level household income changed with educational attainment over the past four decades? Link to Excel data and embedded chart 5 of JUH article
	 History detective/Exploring evidence questions -- illustrate historical concepts in the narrative by posing questions about a primary source, then offer author's analysis to make more transparent how historians do our work
example: show 1965 real estate ads and ask which of these is not like the others? Follow up with explanation of the classified ad research methods
	 Hypothesis testing  -- investigate whether other authors' ideas can be applied to the metropolitan Hartford region
	example: In Robert Beauregard's (1999) essay (insert link) against the unsupported use of the federal complicity in urban decline interpretation, he argues that central-city pop decline was not synchronized with suburbanization across the US. Does this claim apply to metro Hartford?  Test this hypothesis using spreadsheet data and interactive web map.
	 Interactive simulations -- personalize broad structural and historical analyses in the narrative by creating brief user simulations
	example: given a family sociodemographic profile, mortgage calculators, and the web, what kind of real housing can you afford and locate? what are your school options?
	example: what social class are you? (NYTimes interactive graphics on social class)
	example: what are the odds that a 9th grade student with a certain demographic profile will graduate from HS? attend college? graduate from college? (build this based on NYTimes social class odds illustration)
	example: Pretend your family lives at address A, B, C: what school options do you have? Enter data in SmartChoices and compare.
	 Digital highlighter -- readers can use the mouse to highlight the most important passages on their screen, save them to their personal account, add their own annotations, and press a button to print out the highlighted text (with paragraph/page numbers) to bring to class discussion. Additionally, this feature allows the author (and if desired, the public) to view the most frequently highlighted lines in the ebook.

	 Despite these interactive features, this ebook is driven by a central narrative, accompanied by historical claims and evidence.  Readers may talk back to the author, offer different interpretations of the sources, and contribute in new directions, but it is fundamentally a book, not a wiki. Contrast with other fine historical websites (Valley of the Shadow, Seattle website) that have no central narrative.
	 Open-source technology for OTL digital history project Much of our work builds on freely-available Google Maps and Google Earth technology, because: 1) geographical coverage and context; 2) easily modified with open-source JavaScript coding for wide variety of platforms (browsers and eReaders); 3) numerous examples and tech resources freely available. Our digital history maps are consistent with Google mapping terms of service that "your service must be freely accessible to end users" [find source], each of the interactive map products we create will be freely available on UConn MAGIC website in standalone format, separate from the text of the book. While we have selected Google as framework on which to build, if Google's corporate policy were to limit free access to its maps, we would most likely use OpenLayers and OpenStreet instead. Also, map files may be downloaded in GIS and KML (open standard) format.
Currently, only a handful of U.S. urban historians have acquired sufficient GIS skills to use these methods as an integral part of their research. In print format, the most noteworthy exceptions are Amy Hillier's (2003, 2005) articles that reinterpret the influence of federal redlining maps in Philadelphia, and Colin Gordon's (2008) book-length study of urban decline in St. Louis. Similarly, relatively few scholars have effectively used on-line maps to explain urban or civil rights history. Some historians illustrate their claims with static maps from different periods, such as James Gregory's compilation of racial segregation maps and data in the "Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project" (http://depts.washington.edu/civilr/segregated.htm). A few have innovated with web-based applications that allow users to explore layers of data on historical maps, such as Hillier's "Mapping Du Bois" project (http://www.mappingdubois.org/). Yet no one in the field of urban and civil rights history has successfully combined GIS research, narrative interpretation, and web-based interactive mapping into a coherent work of scholarship.
	To achieve this goal, historians need a more robust set of tools to visualize spatial change over time. Three open-source projects have inspired our work, though each has its limitations. HyperCities (http://hypercities.ats.ucla.edu) opened up a Google-based platform for users to contribute individual historical map layers (as georeferenced KML files) for an extendable set of cities. But its timeline slider categorizes maps, rather than animating them, and users cannot easily compare two maps of the same location from different periods. A related site, NYC Oasis (http://www.urbanresearchmaps.org/oasis/map.aspx), offers aerial timeline and transparency controls for users to compare historical images of one location from different periods, using a combination of ESRI ArcGIS server and OpenLayers technology. But it was designed to support maps only for the New York City region. Finally, VisualEyes (formerly HistoryBrowser, http://www.viseyes.org) is a Flash-driven generative browser that allows users to code their own spatial-temporal products, such as animated timeline maps with historical narration (see the "Vinegar Hill" urban renewal project example). While versatile, the tool creates digital products that stand alone on the Internet, rather than part of a wider HyperCities network. The Living and Learning on the Line team seeks to develop our map prototypes in ways that draw on the best features of these emerging technologies.
